Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Applied Soft Computing Journal  journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/asoc  Review article  Deep learning for financial applications : A survey  Ahmet Murat Ozbayoglu   ∗ , Mehmet Ugur Gudelek, Omer Berat Sezer  Department of Computer Engineering, TOBB University of Economics and Technology, Ankara, Turkey  a r t i c l e   i n f o  Article history:  Received 21 April 2019 Received in revised form 26 April 2020 Accepted 2 May 2020 Available online 11 May 2020  Keywords:  Deep learning Finance Computational intelligence Machine learning Financial applications Algorithmic trading Portfolio management Risk assessment Fraud detection  a b s t r a c t  Computational intelligence in finance has been a very popular topic for both academia and financial industry in the last few decades. Numerous studies have been published resulting in various models. Meanwhile, within the Machine Learning (ML) field, Deep Learning (DL) started getting a lot of attention recently, mostly due to its outperformance over the classical models. Lots of different implementations of DL exist today, and the broad interest is continuing. Finance is one particular area where DL models started getting traction, however, the playfield is wide open, a lot of research opportunities still exist. In this paper, we tried to provide a state-of-the-art snapshot of the developed DL models for financial applications. We not only categorized the works according to their intended subfield in finance but also analyzed them based on their DL models. In addition, we also aimed at identifying possible future implementations and highlighted the pathway for the ongoing research within the field.  ©   2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  Contents  1.   Introduction.........................................................................................................................................................................................................................   2 2.   Machine learning in finance ............................................................................................................................................................................................   2 3.   Deep learning......................................................................................................................................................................................................................   3 3.1.   Deep multi layer perceptron ................................................................................................................................................................................   3 3.2.   Convolutional neural networks ............................................................................................................................................................................   3 3.3.   Recurrent neural network.....................................................................................................................................................................................   3 3.4.   Long short term memory......................................................................................................................................................................................   4 3.5.   Restricted Boltzmann machines ...........................................................................................................................................................................   4 3.6.   Deep belief networks ............................................................................................................................................................................................   5 3.7.   Autoencoders..........................................................................................................................................................................................................   5 3.8.   Other deep structures ...........................................................................................................................................................................................   6 4.   Financial applications.........................................................................................................................................................................................................   6 4.1.   Algorithmic trading ...............................................................................................................................................................................................   7 4.1.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for algorithmic trading ........................................................................................................   9 4.2.   Risk assessment .....................................................................................................................................................................................................   9 4.2.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for risk assessment............................................................................................................... 11 4.3.   Fraud detection ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 4.3.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for fraud detection ............................................................................................................... 12 4.4.   Portfolio management ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 12 4.4.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for portfolio management ................................................................................................... 13 4.5.   Asset pricing and derivatives market (options, futures, forward contracts) .................................................................................................. 14 4.5.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for derivatives market ......................................................................................................... 14 4.6.   Cryptocurrency and blockchain studies .............................................................................................................................................................. 14 4.6.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for cryptocurrency and blockchain studies ....................................................................... 15 4.7.   Financial sentiment analysis and behavioral finance ........................................................................................................................................ 15 4.7.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for financial sentiment analysis.......................................................................................... 16  ∗   Corresponding author.  E-mail address:   mozbayoglu@etu.edu.tr (A.M. Ozbayoglu). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106384 1568-4946/ ©   2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

---

2   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  4.8.   Financial text mining ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 16 4.8.1.   Model, feature and dataset selections for financial text mining...................................................................................................... 19 4.9.   Theoretical or conceptual studies ........................................................................................................................................................................ 19 4.10.   Other financial applications.................................................................................................................................................................................. 19 5.   Current snaphot of DL research for financial applications............................................................................................................................................ 19 6.   Discussion and open issues............................................................................................................................................................................................... 21 6.1.   Discussions on DL models .................................................................................................................................................................................... 21 6.2.   Discussions on implementation areas ................................................................................................................................................................. 23 6.3.   Open issues and future work ............................................................................................................................................................................... 23 6.3.1.   Model development perspective .......................................................................................................................................................... 23 6.3.2.   Implementation perspective ................................................................................................................................................................. 23 6.3.3.   Suggestions for future research............................................................................................................................................................ 24 6.4.   Responses to our initial research questions ....................................................................................................................................................... 24 7.   Conclusions.......................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 24 Declaration of competing interest.................................................................................................................................................................................... 24 Acknowledgment ................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 24 References ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 24 Glossary ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 28  1. Introduction  Stöck market forecasting, algorithmic trading, credit risk as- sessment, portfolio allocation, asset pricing and derivatives mar- ket are among the areas where ML researchers focused on de- veloping models that can provide real-time working solutions for the financial industry. Hence, a lot of publications and implemen- tations exist in the literature. However, within the ML field, DL is an emerging area with a rising interest every year. As a result, an increasing number of DL models for finance started appearing in conferences and journals. Our focus in this paper is to present different implementations of the developed financial DL models in such a way that the researchers and practitioners that are interested in the topic can decide which path they should take. In this paper, we tried to provide answers to the following research questions:  •   What financial application areas are of interest to DL com- munity?  •   How mature is the existing research in each of these appli- cation areas?  •   What are the areas that have promising potentials from an academic/industrial research perspective?  •   Which DL models are preferred (and more successful) in different applications?  •   How do DL models pare against traditional soft comput- ing/ML techniques?  •   What is the future direction for DL research in Finance? Our focus was solely on DL implementations for financial ap- plications. A substantial portion of the computational intelligence for finance research is devoted to financial time series forecasting. However, we preferred to concentrate on those studies in a separate survey paper [1] in order to be able to pinpoint other, less covered application areas. Meanwhile, we decided to in- clude algorithmic trading studies with DL based trading strategies which may or may not have an embedded time series forecasting component. For our search methodology, we surveyed and carefully re- viewed the studies that came to our attention from the follow- ing sources: ScienceDirect, ACM Digital Library, Google Scholar, arXiv.org, ResearchGate, Google keyword search for DL and fi- nance. The range of our survey spanned not only journals and conferences, but also Masters and PhD theses, book chapters, arXiv papers and noteworthy technical papers that came up in Google searches. Furthermore, we only chose the articles that were written in English. Most of the papers in this survey used the term ‘‘deep learn- ing’’ in their model description and they were published in the past 5 years. However, we also included some older papers that implemented deep learning models even though they were not called ‘‘deep learning’’ models at their time of publication. Some examples for such models include Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Jordan–Elman networks. As will be introduced in the next section, a lot of ML surveys exist for different areas of finance, however, no study has concen- trated on DL implementations. We genuinely believe our study will highlight the major advancements in the field and provide a roadway for the intended researchers that would like to develop DL models for different financial applications. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. After this brief introduction, in Section 2, the existing surveys that are focused on ML and soft computing studies for financial applications are presented. In Section 3, we will provide the basic working DL models that are used in finance, i.e. Convolutional Neural Net- work (CNN), Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM), etc. Section 4 will focus on the implementation areas of the DL models in finance. Some of these include algorithmic trading, credit risk assessment, portfolio allocation, asset pricing, fraud detection and derivatives market. After briefly stating the problem definition in each subsection, DL implementations of each associated problem will be given. In Section 5, these studies will be compared and some overall statistical results will be presented including histograms and heatmaps about the distribution of different subfields, models, features, datasets. These statistics will not only demonstrate the current state for the field but also will show which areas are mature, which areas still have opportunities and which areas are getting accelerated attention. Section 6 will have discussions about what has been done in the field so far and where the indus- try is going. The chapter will also include the achievements and expectations of both academia and the industry. Also, open areas and recommended research topics will be mentioned. Finally, in Section 7, we will summarize the findings and conclude.  2. Machine learning in finance  Finance has always been one of the most studied application areas for ML. So far, thousands of research papers were published in various fields within finance, and the overall interest does not seem to diminish anytime soon. Even though this survey paper is solely focused on DL implementations, we wanted to provide the

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   3  audience with some insights about previous ML studies by citing the related surveys within the past 20 years. There are a number of ML surveys and books with a general perspective such that their focus is not on any particular im- plementation area. Bahrammirzaee et al. [2] compared Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), Expert Systems and Hybrid models for various financial applications. Zhang et al. [3] reviewed the data mining techniques including Genetic Algorithm (GA), rule-based systems, Neural Networks (NNs) preferred in different financial application areas. Similarly, Mochn et al. [4] also provided in- sights about financial implementations based on soft computing techniques like fuzzy logic, probabilistic reasoning and NNs. Even though Pulakkazhy et al. [5] focused particularly on data mining models in banking applications, they still had a span of several subtopics within the field. Meanwhile, Mullainathan et al. [6] studied the ML implementations from a high level and econo- metric point of view. Likewise, Gai et al. [7] reviewed the Fintech studies and implementations not only from an ML perspective but also from a different point of view such as security, data- oriented techniques, and application. The publications in [8–11] constitute some of the books that cover the implementations of soft computing models in finance. Meanwhile, there are some survey papers that are also not ap- plication area-specific but rather focused on particular ML tech- niques. One of those soft computing techniques is the family of Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), i.e. GA, Particle Swarm Optimiza- tion (PSO), etc. commonly used in financial optimization imple- mentations like Portfolio Selection. Chen et al. [12] wrote a book covering GAs and Genetic Programming (GP) in Computational Fi- nance. Later, Castillo et al. [13], Ponsich et al. [14], Aguilar-Rivera et al. [15] extensively surveyed Multiobjective Evolutionary Al- gorithms (MOEAs) on portfolio optimization and other various financial applications. Since ANNs were quite popular among researchers, a number of survey papers were just dedicated to them. Wong et al. [16] covered early implementations of ANNs in finance. Li et al. [17] reviewed implementations of ANNs for stock price forecasting and some other financial applications. Lately, Elmsili et al. [18] contained ANN applications in economics and management re- search in their survey. In addition, LeBaron [19] covered the studies focused on agent- based computational finance. Meanwhile, Chalup et al. [20] wrote a book chapter on kernel methods in financial applications which includes models like Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Support Vector Machine (SVM). And then, there are application-specific survey papers that single out particular financial areas which are quite useful and informative for researchers that already know what they are looking for. These papers will be covered in the appropriate subsections of Section 4 during problem description. In the next section, brief working structures of the DL models used in the financial applications will be given.  3. Deep learning  Deep Learning is a particular type of ML that consists of multiple ANN layers. It provides high-level abstraction for data modeling [21]. In the literature, different DL models exist: Deep Multilayer Perceptron (DMLP), CNN, RNN, LSTM, Restricted Boltz- mann Machines (RBMs), Deep Belief Networks (DBNs), and Au- toencoders (AEs).  3.1. Deep multi layer perceptron  In the literature, DMLP was the first proposed ANN model of its kind. DMLP networks consist of input, output and hidden layers just like an ordinary Multilayer Perceptron (MLP); however, the number of layers in DMLP is more than MLP. Each neuron in every layer has   input ( x ),   w eight ( w ) and   bias ( b ) terms. An output of a neuron in the neural network is illustrated in Eq. (1). In addition, each neuron has a nonlinear activation function which produces the output of that neuron through accumulating weighted in- puts from the neurons in the preceding layer. Sigmoid [22], hyperbolic tangent [23], Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [24], leaky ReLU [25], swish [26], and softmax [27] are among the most preferred nonlinear activation functions in the literature.  y i   =   σ   (  ∑  i  W i x i   +   b i )   (1) With multi-layer deep ANNs, more efficient classification and regression performances are achieved when compared against shallow nets. DMLPs’ learning process is implemented through backpropagation. The amount of the output error in the output layer neurons is also reflected back to the neurons in the previous layers. In DMLP, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) method is (mostly) used for the optimization of learning (to update the weights of the connections between the layers). In Fig. 1, a DMLP model, the layers, the neurons in layers, the weights between the neurons are shown.  3.2. Convolutional neural networks  CNN is a type of Deep Neural Network (DNN) that is mostly used for image classification and image recognition problems. In its methodology, the whole image is scanned with filters. In the literature, 1   ×   1, 3   ×   3 and 5   ×   5 filter sizes are mostly used. In most of the CNN architectures, there are different types of layers: convolutional, pooling (average or maximum), fully connected layers. CNN consists of convolutional layers based on the convolutional operation. Fig. 2 shows the generalized CNN architecture that has different layers: convolutional, subsampling (pooling) and fully connected layers.  3.3. Recurrent neural network  In the literature, RNN has been mostly used on sequential data such as time-series data, audio and speech data, language. It consists of RNN units that are structured consecutively. Unlike feed-forward networks, RNNs use internal memory to process the incoming inputs. RNNs are used in the analysis of time series data in various fields (handwriting recognition, speech recognition, etc.). There are different types of RNN structures: one to many, many to one, many to many. Generally, RNN processes the input sequence series one by one at a time, during its operation. Units in the hidden layer hold information about the history of the input in the ‘‘state vector’’ [21]. RNNs can be trained using the Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT) method. Using BPTT, the differentiation of the loss at any time   t   has reflected the weights of the network at the previous time step. Training of RNNs are more difficult than Feedforward Neural Networks (FFNNs) and the training period of RNNs takes longer. In Fig. 3, the information flow in the RNN’s hidden layer is divided into discrete times. The status of the node S at different times of   t   is shown as   s t   , the input value   x   at different times is  x t   , and the output value   o   at different times is shown as   o t   . The parameter values ( U ,   W   ,   V   ) are always used in the same step.

---

4   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Fig. 1.   Deep multi layer neural network forward pass and backpropagation [21].  Fig. 2.   Generalized convolutional neural network architecture.  Fig. 3.   RNN cell through time [21].  3.4. Long short term memory  LSTM network [28] is a different type of DL network specif- ically intended for sequential data analysis. The advantage of LSTM networks lies in the fact that both short term and long term values in the network can be remembered. Therefore, LSTM networks are mostly used for sequential data analysis (automatic speech recognition, language translation, handwritten character recognition, time-series data forecasting, etc.) by DL researchers. LSTM networks consist of LSTM units. LSTM unit is composed of cells having input, output and forget gates. These three gates regulate the information flow. With these features, each cell remembers the desired values over arbitrary time intervals. LSTM cells combine to form layers of neural networks. Fig. 4 illus- trates the basic LSTM unit ( σ g   : sigmoid function,   tanh : hyperbolic tangent function,   X   : multiplication,   +   : addition).  3.5. Restricted Boltzmann machines  RBM is a different type of ANN model that can learn the prob- ability distribution of the input set [29]. RBMs are mostly used for dimensionality reduction, classification, and feature learning. RBM is a bipartite, undirected graphical model that consists of two layers; visible and hidden layer. The units in the layer are not connected to each other. Each cell is a computational point that processes the input. Each unit makes stochastic decisions

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   5  Fig. 4.   Basic LSTM unit [28].  Fig. 5.   RBM visible and hidden layers [29].  about whether transmitting the input data or not. The inputs are multiplied by specific weights, certain threshold values (bias) are added to the input values, then the calculated values are passed through an activation function. In the reconstruction stage, the results in the outputs re-enter the network as the input, then they exit from the visible layer as the output. The values of the previous input and the values after the processes are compared to find the parameter which is used for optimization. During the training of RBM, this parameter (cost function) is reduced in each iteration. The learning is performed multiple times on the network [29]. RBM is a two-layer, bipartite, and undirected graphical model that consists of two layers; visible and hidden layers (see Fig. 5). The layers are not connected among them- selves. The disadvantage of RBM is its tricky training. ‘‘RBMs are tricky because although there are good estimators of the log- likelihood gradient, there are no known cheap ways of estimating the log-likelihood itself’’ [30].  3.6. Deep belief networks  DBN is a type of ANN that consists of a stack of RBM layers. DBN is a probabilistic generative model that consists of latent variables. DBNs are used for finding independent and discrimi- native features in the input set using an unsupervised approach. DBN can learn to reconstruct the input set in a probabilistic  Fig. 6.   Deep belief network [29].  Fig. 7.   Basic autoencoder structure.  way during the training process. Then the layers on the net- work begin to detect the discriminative features. After the learn- ing step, supervised learning is carried out to perform for the classification [31]. Fig. 6 illustrates the DBN structure.  3.7. Autoencoders  AE networks are commonly used in DL models, wherein they remap the inputs (features) such that the inputs are more rep- resentative for the classification. In other words, AE networks perform an unsupervised feature learning process. A representa- tion of a data set is learned by reducing the dimensionality with an AE. In the literature, AEs have been used for feature extraction and dimensionality reduction [27,32]. The architecture of an AE has similarities with that of a FFNN. It consists of an input layer, output layer and one (or more) hidden layer that connects them together. The number of nodes in the input layer and the number of nodes in the output layer are equal to each other in AEs, and they have a symmetrical structure. AEs contain two components: encoder and decoder. The advantages of the usage of AE are dimensionality reduc- tion and feature learning. However, reducing dimensions and feature extraction in AE cause some drawbacks. Focusing on minimizing the loss of the data relationship in the code of AE causes the loss of some significant data relationship. This may be a drawback of AE[50]. Fig. 7 shows the basic AE structure.

---

6   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 1  Algo-trading applications embedded with time series forecasting models. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Environment [33]   GarantiBank in BIST, Turkey 2016   OCHLV, Spread, Volatility, Turnover, etc. PLR, Graves LSTM   MSE, RMSE, MAE, RSE, Correlation R-square Spark [34]   CSI300, Nifty50, HSI, Nikkei 225, S&P500, DJIA 2010–2016   OCHLV, Technical Indicators WT, Stacked autoencoders, LSTM MAPE, Correlation coefficient, THEIL-U – [35]   Chinese Stocks   2007–2017   OCHLV   CNN + LSTM   Annualized Return, Mxm Retracement Python [36]   50 stocks from NYSE   2007–2016   Price data   SFM   MSE   – [37]   The LOB of 5 stocks of Finnish Stock Market 2010   FI-2010 dataset: bid/ask and volume WMTR, MDA   Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-Score – [38]   300 stocks from SZSE, Commodity 2014–2015   Price data   FDDR, DMLP+RL   Profit, return, SR, profit-loss curves Keras [39]   S&P500 Index   1989–2005   Price data, Volume   LSTM   Return, STD, SR, Accuracy Python, TensorFlow, Keras, R, H2O [40]   Stock of National Bank of Greece (ETE). 2009–2014   FTSE100, DJIA, GDAX, NIKKEI225, EUR/USD, Gold GASVR, LSTM   Return, volatility, SR, Accuracy Tensorflow [41]   Chinese stock-IF-IH-IC contract 2016–2017   Decisions for price change MODRL+LSTM   Profit and loss, SR   – [42]   Singapore Stock Market Index 2010–2017   OCHL of last 10 days of Index DMLP   RMSE, MAPE, Profit, SR – [43]   GBP/USD   2017   Price data   Reinforcement Learning + LSTM + NES SR, downside deviation ratio, total profit Python, Keras, Tensorflow [44]   Commodity, FX future, ETF 1991–2014   Price Data   DMLP   SR, capability ratio, return C++, Python [45]   USD/GBP, S&P500, FTSE100, oil, gold 2016   Price data   AE + CNN   SR, % volatility, avg return/trans, rate of return H2O [46]   Bitcoin, Dash, Ripple, Monero, Litecoin, Dogecoin, Nxt, Namecoin 2014–2017   MA, BOLL, the CRIX returns, Euribor interest rates, OCHLV LSTM, RNN, DMLP   Accuracy, F1-measure Python, Tensorflow [47]   S&P500, KOSPI, HSI, and EuroStoxx50 1987–2017   200-days stock price Deep Q-Learning, DMLP Total profit, Correlation – [48]   Stocks in the S&P500   1990–2015   Price data   DMLP, GBT, RF   Mean return, MDD, Calmar ratio H2O [49]   Fundamental and Technical Data, Economic Data –   Fundamental , technical and market information CNN   –   –  3.8. Other deep structures  The DL models are not limited to the ones mentioned in the previous subsections. Some of the other well-known struc- tures that exist in the literature are Deep Reinforcement Learn- ing (DRL), Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), Capsule Net- works, Deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs). Meanwhile, we have not encountered any noteworthy academic or industrial publication on financial applications using these models so far, with the exception of DRL which started getting attention lately. However, that does not imply that these models do not fit well with the financial domain. On the contrary, they offer great potentials for researchers and practitioners participating in finance and deep learning community who are willing to go the extra mile to come up with novel solutions. Since research for model developments in DL is ongoing, new structures keep on coming. However, the aforementioned models and their variations currently cover almost all of the published work. Next section will provide details about the implementation areas along with the preferred DL models.  4. Financial applications  There are a lot of financial applications of soft computing in the literature. DL has been studied in most of them, although, some opportunities still exist in a number of fields. Throughout this section, we categorized the implementation areas and presented them in separate subsections. Besides, in each subsection we tabulated the representative models, datasets, features of the relevant studies in order to provide as much information as possible in the limited space. In addition, we tried to elaborate on the preferred model, data and feature choices for each financial application area separately in the subsections. Our focus was to identify the dominant mod- els, features and data types that standout for each application area and very briefly explain the reasons behind those particular choices. To provide an overall snapshot view, we accumulated the corresponding model, feature and dataset associations cou- pled with the financial application areas within three separate heatmaps (Figs. 10–12) that are presented in Section 5.

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   7  Table 2  Classification (buy–sell signal, or trend detection) based algo-trading models. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Environment [51]   Stocks in Dow30   1997–2017   RSI   DMLP with genetic algorithm Annualized return   Spark MLlib, Java [52]   SPY ETF, 10 stocks from S&P500 2014–2016   Price data   FFNN   Cumulative gain   MatConvNet, Matlab [53]   Dow30 stocks   2012–2016   Close data and several technical indicators LSTM   Accuracy   Python, Keras, Tensorflow, TALIB [54]   High-frequency record of all orders 2014–2017   Price data, record of all orders, transactions LSTM   Accuracy   – [55]   Nasdaq Nordic (Kesko Oyj, Outokumpu Oyj, Sampo, Rautaruukki, Wartsila Oyj) 2010   Price and volume data in LOB LSTM   Precision, Recall, F1-score, Cohen’s k – [56]   17 ETFs   2000–2016   Price data, technical indicators CNN   Accuracy, MSE, Profit, AUROC Keras, Tensorflow [57]   Stocks in Dow30 and 9 Top Volume ETFs 1997–2017   Price data, technical indicators CNN with feature imaging Recall, precision, F1-score, annualized return Python, Keras, Tensorflow, Java [58]   FTSE100   2000–2017   Price data   CAE   TR, SR, MDD, mean return – [59]   Nasdaq Nordic (Kesko Oyj, Outokumpu Oyj, Sampo, Rautaruukki, Wartsila Oyj) 2010   Price, Volume data, 10 orders of the LOB CNN   Precision, Recall, F1-score, Cohen’s k Theano, Scikit learn, Python [60]   Borsa Istanbul 100 Stocks 2011–2015   75 technical indicators and OCHLV CNN   Accuracy   Keras [61]   ETFs and Dow30   1997–2007   Price data   CNN with feature imaging Annualized return   Keras, Tensorflow [62]   8 experimental assets from bond/derivative market –   Asset prices data   RL, DMLP, Genetic Algorithm Learning and genetic algorithm error – [63]   10 stocks from S&P500   –   Stock Prices   TDNN, RNN, PNN   Missed opportunities, false alarms ratio – [64]   London Stock Exchange   2007–2008   Limit order book state, trades, buy/sell orders, order deletions CNN   Accuracy, kappa   Caffe [65]   Cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin   2014–2017   Price data   CNN, RNN, LSTM   Accumulative portfolio value, MDD, SR –  Also, the readers should note that there were some overlaps between different implementation areas for some papers. There were two main reasons for that: In some papers, multiple prob- lems were addressed separately, for e.g. text mining was studied for feature extraction, then algorithmic trading was implemented. For some other cases, the paper might fit directly into multiple implementation areas due to the survey structure, for e.g. cryp- tocurrency portfolio management. In such cases we included the papers in all of the relevant subsections creating some overlaps. Some of the existing study areas can be grouped as follows:  4.1. Algorithmic trading  Algorithmic trading (or Algo-trading) is defined as buy–sell decisions made solely by algorithmic models. These decisions can be based on some simple rules, mathematical models, optimized processes, or as in the case of machine/deep learning, highly com- plex function approximation techniques. With the introduction of electronic online trading platforms and frameworks, algorithmic trading took over the finance industry in the last two decades. As a result, Algo-trading models based on DL also started getting attention. Most of the Algo-trading applications are coupled with price prediction models for market timing purposes. As a result, a majority of the price or trend forecasting models that trigger buy–sell signals based on their prediction are also considered as Algo-trading systems. However, there are also some studies that propose stand-alone Algo-trading models focused on the dynam- ics of the transaction itself by optimizing trading parameters such as bid–ask spread, analysis of limit order book, position-sizing, etc. High Frequency Trading (HFT) researchers are particularly interested in this area. Hence, DL models also started appearing in HFT studies. Before diving into the DL implementations, it would be bene- ficial to briefly mention about the existing ML surveys on Algo- trading. Hu et al. [75] reviewed the implementations of various EAs on Algorithmic Trading Models. Since financial time series forecasting is highly coupled with algorithmic trading, there are a number of ML survey papers focused on Algo-trading models based on forecasting. The interested readers can refer to [1] for more information.

---

8   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 3  Stand-alone and/or other algorithmic models. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Environment [66]   DAX, FTSE100, call/put options 1991–1998   Price data   Markov model, RNN Ewa-measure, iv, daily profits’ mean and std – [67]   Taiwan Stock Index Futures, Mini Index Futures 2012–2014   Price data to image Visualization method + CNN Accumulated profits,accuracy – [68]   Energy-Sector/ Company-Centric Tweets in S&P500 2015–2016   Text and Price data LSTM, RNN, GRU   Return, SR, precision, recall, accuracy Python, Tweepy API [69]   CME FIX message   2016   Limit order book, time-stamp, price data RNN   Precision, recall, F1-measure Python, TensorFlow, R [70]   Taiwan stock index futures (TAIFEX) 2017   Price data   Agent based RL with CNN pre-trained Accuracy   – [71]   Stocks from S&P500   2010–2016   OCHLV   DCNL   PCC, DTW, VWL   Pytorch [72]   News from NowNews, AppleDaily, LTN, MoneyDJ for 18 stocks 2013–2014   Text, Sentiment   DMLP   Return   Python, Tensorflow [73]   489 stocks from S&P500 and NASDAQ-100 2014–2015   Limit Order Book   Spatial neural network Cross entropy error NVIDIA’s cuDNN [74]   Experimental dataset   –   Price data   DRL with CNN, LSTM, GRU, DMLP Mean profit   Python  As far as the DL research is concerned, Tables 1, 2, and 3 present the past and current status of algo-trading studies based on DL models. The papers are distributed to these tables as follows: Table 1 has the particular algorithmic trading implemen- tations that are embedded with time series forecasting models, whereas Table 2 is focused on classification based (buy–sell Sig- nal, or Trend Detection) algo-trading models. Finally, Table 3 presents stand-alone studies or other algorithmic trading mod- els (pairs trading, arbitrage, etc.) that do not fit into the above categorization criteria. Most of the Algo-trading studies were concentrated on the prediction of stock or index prices. Meanwhile, LSTM was the most preferred DL model in these implementations. In [33], mar- ket microstructures based trade indicators were used as the input into RNN with Graves LSTM to perform the price prediction for algorithmic stock trading. Bao et al. [34] used technical indicators as the input into Wavelet Transforms (WT), LSTM and Stacked Autoencoders (SAEs) for the forecasting of stock prices. In [35], CNN and LSTM model structures were implemented together (CNN was used for stock selection, LSTM was used for price prediction). Using a different model, Zhang et al. [36] proposed a novel State Frequency Memory (SFM) recurrent network for stock price prediction with multiple frequency trading patterns and achieved better   prediction   and   trading   performances.   In   an   HFT   trad- ing system, Tran et al. [37] developed a DL model that im- plements price change forecasting through mid-price prediction using high-frequency limit order book data with tensor represen- tation. In [38], the authors used Fuzzy Deep Direct Reinforcement Learning (FDDR) for stock price prediction and trading signal generation. For index prediction, the following studies are noteworthy. In [39], the price prediction of S&P500 index using LSTM was implemented. Mourelatos et al. [40] compared the performance of LSTM and GA with a SVR (GASVR) for Greek Stock Exchange Index prediction. Si et al. [41] implemented Chinese intraday futures market trading model with DRL and LSTM. Yong et al. [42] used DMLP method and Open,Close,High, Low (OCHL) of the time series index data to predict Singapore Stock Market index data. Forex or cryptocurrency trading was implemented in some studies. In [43], agent inspired trading using deep (recurrent) reinforcement learning and LSTM was implemented and tested on the trading of GBP/USD. In [44], DMLP was implemented for the prediction of commodities and FX trading prices. Korczak et al. [45] implemented a forex trading (GBP/PLN) model using several different input parameters on a multi-agent-based trading environment. One of the agents used CNN for prediction and outperformed all other models. On the cryptocurrency side, Spilak et al. [46] used several cryp- tocurrencies to construct a dynamic portfolio using LSTM, RNN, DMLP methods. In a versatile study, Jeong et al. [47] combined deep Q-learning and DMLP to implement price forecasting and they intended to solve three separate problems: Increasing profit in a market, prediction of the number of shares to trade, and preventing overfitting with insufficient financial data. In [51], technical analysis indicator’s (Relative Strength Index (RSI)) buy & sell limits were optimized with GA which was used for buy–sell signals. After optimization, DMLP was also used for function approximation. In [52], the authors combined deep Fully Connected Neural Network (FNN) with a selective trade strategy unit to predict the next price. In [53], the crossover and Moving Average Convergence and Divergence (MACD) signals were used to predict the trend of the Dow 30 stocks’ prices. Sirignano et al. [54] proposed a novel method that used limit order book flow and history information for the determination of the stock movements using LSTM model. Tsantekidis et al. [55] also used limit order book time series data and LSTM method for the trend prediction. Several studies focused on utilizing CNN based models due to their success in image classification problems. However, in order to do that, the financial input data needed to be trans- formed into images which required some creative preprocessing. Gudelek et al. [56] converted time series of price data to 2- dimensional images using technical analysis and classified them with deep CNN. Similarly, Sezer et al. [57] also proposed a novel technique that converts financial time series data that consisted of technical analysis indicator outputs to 2-dimensional images and classified these images using CNN to determine the trading

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   9  signals. In [58], candlestick chart graphs were converted into 2- dimensional images. Then, unsupervised convolutional AE was fed with the images to implement portfolio construction. Tsan- tekidis et al. [59] proposed a novel method that used the last 100 entries from the limit order book to create a 2-dimensional image for the stock price prediction using CNN method. In [60], an innovative method was proposed that uses CNN with correlated features combined together to predict the trend of the stocks prices. Finally, Sezer et al. [61] directly used bar chart images as inputs to CNN and predicted if the image class was Buy, Hold or Sell, hence a corresponding Algo-trading model was developed. Serrano et al. [62] proposed a novel method called ‘‘GoldAI Sachs’’ Asset Banker Reinforcement Learning (RL) Algorithm for algorithmic trading. The proposed method used a random neu- ral network, GP, and RL to generate the trading signals. Saad et al. [63] compared Timedelay Neural Network (TDNN), RNN and Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN) for trend detection using 10 stocks from S&P500. In [64], HFT microstructures forecasting with CNN method was performed. In [65], cryptocurrency portfolio management based on three different proposed models (basic RNN, LSTM and CNN) was implemented. Tino et al. [66] used The Deutscher Aktienindex (DAX), London Financial Times Stock Exchange Index (FTSE)100, call and put options prices to predict the changes with Markov models and used the financial time series data to predict volatility changes with RNN. Meanwhile, Chen et al. [67] proposed a method that uses a filterbank CNN Algorithm on 15   ×   15 volatility times series converted synthetic images. In the study, the financial domain knowledge and filterbank mechanism were combined to determine the trading signals. Bari et al. [68] used text mining to extract information from the tweets and financial news and used LSTM, RNN, Gated-Recurrent Unit (GRU) for the generation of the trading signals. Dixon et al. [69] used RNN for the sequence classification of the limit order book to predict a next event price-flip. Chen et al. [70] used 1-dimensional CNN with an agent-based RL algorithm on the Taiwan stock index futures (TAIFEX) dataset. Wang et al. [71] proposed a Deep Co-investment Network Learn- ing (DeepCNL) method that used convolutional and RNN layers. The investment pattern was determined using the extracted Rise– Fall trends. Day et al. [72] used financial sentiment analysis using text mining and DMLP for stock algorithmic trading. Sirignano et al. [73] proposed a ‘‘spatial neural network’’ model that used limit order book and spatial features for algorithmic trading. Their model estimates the best bid–ask prices using bid, ask prices in the limit order book. Gao et al. [74] used GRU, LSTM units, CNN, and DMLP to model Q values for the implementation of the DRL method.  4.1.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for algorithmic trading  Since algorithmic trading relies on generating profitable finan- cial transactions through identifying accurate entry-exit points from the price signal, it would make sense to use the models, features and datasets that highlight the temporal characteristics of the asset that is to be traded. So, one would assume, the models that are popular for time series forecasting would fit well into this description. This was precisely what we had encountered during our analyses. The majority (23) of the DL models used for algorithmic trading applications were RNN types, namely LSTM, RNN, and GRU. CNN and DMLP were also among the favored model choices, especially by the researchers focused on trend forecasting, which is basically a classification problem. In a similar fashion, features that had temporal characteristics dominated the selected feature set for the algorithmic trading studies. Among those, price data, market characteristics, techni- cal indicators, index, market microstructure data were the most notable ones. The datasets that were preferred by the researchers were mostly the index/ETF data from US, European and Chinese mar- kets. The price data of individual stocks, cryptocurrencies, com- modities or forex were also quite common. In addition, there were also some cases where text data (news, tweets) were used as part of the algotrading systems. Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the algorithmic trading implementations are presented in Figs. 10– 12.  4.2. Risk assessment  Another study area that has been of interest to DL researchers is Risk Assessment which identifies the ‘‘riskiness’’ of any given asset, firm, person, product, bank, etc. Several different versions of this general problem exist, such as bankruptcy prediction, credit   scoring,   credit   evaluation,   loan/insurance   underwriting, bond rating, loan application, consumer credit determination, corporate credit rating, mortgage choice decision, financial dis- tress prediction, business failure prediction. Correctly identifying the risk status in such cases is crucial, since asset pricing is highly dependent on these risk assessment measures. The mortgage crisis based on improper risk assessment of Credit Default Swaps (CDS) between financial institutions caused the real-estate bubble to burst in 2008 and resulted in the Great Recession [76]. The majority of the risk assessment studies concentrate on credit scoring and bank distress classification. However, there are also a few papers covering mortgage default possibility, risky transaction detection or crisis forecasting. Meanwhile, there are some anomaly detection studies for risk assessment, most of which also fall under the ‘‘Fraud Detection’’ category which will be covered in the next subsection. Before going into the details about specific DL implementa- tions, it is worthwhile to mention the existing ML surveys on the topic. Kirkos et al. [97], Ravi et al. [98], Fethi et al. [99] reviewed the bank performance assessment studies based on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and ML models. Lahsasna et al. [100], Chen et al. [101] surveyed the credit scoring and credit risk assessment studies based on soft computing techniques whereas Marques et al. [102] focused only on Evolutionary Computa- tion (EC) Models for credit scoring implementations. Meanwhile, Kumar et al. [103], Verikas et al. [104] reviewed ML implementa- tions of bankruptcy prediction studies. Similarly, Sun et al. [105] provided a comprehensive survey about research on financial distress and corporate failures. Apart from these reviews, for assessing overall risk, Lin et al. [106] surveyed the financial crisis prediction studies based on ML models. Since risk assessment is vital for survival in today’s financial world, a lot of researchers turned their attention to DL for higher accuracy. Tables 4 and 5 provide snapshot information about the different risk assessment studies implemented using various DL models. For credit score classification (see Table 4), Luo et al. [77], used CDS data for Corporate Credit rating and corresponding credit classification (A,B or C). Among the tested models, DBN with RBM performed the best. This implementation was probably the first study to implement Credit rating with DBN. Similarly, in [78], a cascaded hybrid model of DBN, Backpropagation and SVM for credit classification was implemented and good performance re- sults (the accuracy was above 80%–90%) were achieved. In [79], credit risk classification was achieved by using an ensemble of DMLP networks each using subspaces of the whole space by k- means (using minority class in each, but only a partial subspace of the majority class). The data imbalance problem was handled by using multiple subspaces for each classifier, where each of them had all the positive (minor) instances, but a subsample of negative

---

10   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 4  Credit scoring or classification studies. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [77]   The XR 14 CDS contracts   2016   Recovery rate, spreads, sector and region DBN+RBM   AUROC, FN, FP, Accuracy WEKA [78]   German, Japanese credit datasets –   Personal financial variables SVM + DBN   Weighted- accuracy, TP, TN – [79]   Credit data from Kaggle   –   Personal financial variables DMLP   Accuracy, TP, TN, G-mean – [80]   Australian, German credit data –   Personal financial variables GP + AE as Boosted DMLP FP   Python, Scikit-learn [81]   German, Australian credit dataset –   Personal financial variables DCNN, DMLP   Accuracy, False/Missed alarm – [82]   Consumer credit data from Chinese finance company –   Relief algorithm chose the 50 most important features CNN + Relief   AUROC, K-s statistic, Accuracy Keras [83]   Credit approval dataset by UCI Machine Learning repo –   UCI credit approval dataset Rectifier, Tanh, Maxout DL –   AWS EC2, H2O, R  Table 5  Financial distress, bankruptcy, bank risk, mortgage risk, crisis forecasting studies. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [84]   966 french firms   –   Financial ratios   RBM+SVM   Precision, Recall   – [85]   883 BHC from EDGAR   2006–2017   Tokens, weighted sentiment polarity, leverage and ROA CNN, LSTM, SVM, RF Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-score Keras, Python, Scikit-learn [86]   The event data set for large European banks, news articles from Reuters 2007–2014   Word, sentence   DMLP +NLP preprocess Relative usefulness, F1-score – [87]   Event dataset on European banks, news from Reuters 2007–2014   Text, sentence   Sentence vector + DFFN Usefulness, F1-score, AUROC – [88]   News from Reuters, fundamental data 2007–2014   Financial ratios and news text doc2vec + NN   Relative usefulness   Doc2vec [89]   Macro/Micro economic variables, Bank charac- teristics/performance variables from BHC 1976–2017   Macro economic variables and bank performances CGAN, MVN, MV-t, LSTM, VAR, FE-QAR RMSE, Log likelihood, Loan loss rate – [90]   Financial statements of French companies 2002–2006   Financial ratios   DBN   Recall, Precision, F1-score, FP, FN – [91]   Stock returns of American publicly-traded companies from CRSP 2001–2011   Price data   DBN   Accuracy   Python, Theano [92]   Financial statements of several companies from Japanese stock market 2002–2016   Financial ratios   CNN   F1-score, AUROC   – [93]   Mortgage dataset with local and national economic factors 1995–2014   Mortgage related features DMLP   Negative average log-likelihood AWS [94]   Mortgage data from Norwegian financial service group, DNB 2012–2016   Personal financial variables CNN   Accuracy, Sensitivity, Specificity, AUROC – [95]   Private brokerage company’s real data of risky transactions –   250 features: order details, etc. CNN, LSTM   F1-Score   Keras, Tensorflow [96]   Several datasets combined to create a new one 1996–2017   Index data, 10-year Bond yield, exchange rates, Logit, CART, RF, SVM, NN, XGBoost, DMLP AUROC, KS, G-mean, likelihood ratio, DP, BA, WBA R  (majority) instances, finally they used an ensemble of DMLPs combining each subspace model. In [80], credit scoring was per- formed using a SAE network and GP model to create credit assessment rules in order to generate good or bad credit cases. In another study, Neagoe et al. [81] classified credit scores using various DMLP and deep CNN networks. In a different study [82],

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   11  consumer credit scoring classification was implemented with a 2-D representation of the input consumer data through trans- forming the data into a 2-D pixel matrix. Then the resulting images were used as the training and test data for CNN. 2-D pixel matrix representation of the consumer data was adapted by using CNN for image classification. This was the first implementation of credit scoring using CNN. Niimi [83] used UCI credit approval dataset 1   to compare DL, SVM, Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) and provided information about credit fraud and credit approval applications; then experimented with the credit approval problem with several models. Various models were compared for credit approval classi- fication. Also, some introduction about credit fraud detection was provided. Financial distress prediction for banks and corporates are stud- ied extensively (see Table 5). In [84], a hybrid DBN with SVM was used for financial distress prediction to identify whether the firm was in trouble or not, whereas bank risk classification was studied in [85]. In [86], news semantics were extracted by the word sequence learning and associated events were labeled with the bank stress, then from the formed semantic vector representation, the bank stress was determined and classified against a threshold. Prediction and semantic meaning extraction were integrated in a neat way. In another study [87], text mining was again used for identifying the bank distress by extracting the data from financial news and then using a Deep Feed For- ward Network (DFFN) on semantic sentence vectors extracted from word embeddings to classify if there was an event or not. Similarly, Cerchiello et al. [88] used text mining from the financial news to classify bank distress. Malik et al. [89] evaluated the bank stress by first predicting the bank’s performance through an LSTM network, then Backpropagation network was used for finding the bank stress level. There are also a number of research papers that were focused on bankruptcy or corporate default prediction. Ribeiro et al. [90] implemented bankruptcy prediction with DBN. The results of DBN were compared with SVM and RBM. Yeh et al. [91] used the stock returns of default and solvent companies as inputs to RBM used as SAE, then the output of RBM was used as input to DBN to predict if the company was solvent or default. The results were compared with an SVM model and the DBN model outperformed SVM. Hosaka et al. [92] tried a different approach by converting the financial data to the image to use CNN for bankruptcy prediction. The remaining implementations of risk assessment are as fol- lows: Sirignano et al. [93] used the mortgage application data of 20 years for identifying the mortgage risk using various pa- rameters. They also performed a lot of analyses relating different factors that affected the mortgage payment structure. The authors also analyzed the prepayment and delinquency behavior in their assessment. For another mortgage risk assessment application, Kvamme et al. [94] used CNN and RF models to predict whether a customer would default on its mortgage or not. In a differ- ent study, Abroyan et al. [95] used CNN and LSTM networks to classify if a transaction performed on the stock market (trade) was risky or not and high accuracy was achieved. Finally, Chatzis et al. [96] developed several ML and DL models for detecting events that caused the stock market to crash. DL models had good classification (detecting crisis or not) performance.  4.2.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for risk assessment  Risk assessment is mostly determined from company state- ments,   financial   reports,   or   analyst   reports   as   well   as micro/macroeconomic data. As a result, the models that success- fully integrate spatial and temporal data would probably perform  1   https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.html.  better, thus preferred by the researchers. DMLP, LSTM and CNN were among the most selected models. Since risk assessment can be considered as a classification problem, choosing DMLP and CNN were logical choices for such implementations. However through using LSTM, it might be easier to preserve the temporal nature of the problem. Meanwhile, there were also a few existing studies using other DL models; probably because risk assessment has a wide span of subtopics. Meanwhile the most important features that were used for risk assessment models were based on text data extracted from company/personal financial statements. Even though not as often, there were also some other features like market microstructure data or price data that were also used. The datasets for risk assessment were highly associated with the features. The most notable datasets were composed of credit data, consumer data and financial reports. Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the risk assessment implementations are presented in Figs. 10–12.  4.3. Fraud detection  Financial fraud is one of the areas where the governments and authorities are desperately trying to find a permanent solution. Several different financial fraud cases exist such as credit card fraud, money laundering, consumer credit fraud, tax evasion, bank fraud, insurance claim fraud. This is one of the most exten- sively studied areas of finance for ML research and several survey papers were published accordingly. At different times, Kirkos et al. [107], Yue et al. [108], Wang et al. [109], Phua et al. [110], Ngai et al. [111], Sharma et al. [112], West et al. [113] all reviewed the accounting and financial fraud detection studies based on soft computing and data mining techniques. These type of studies mostly can be considered as anomaly detection and are generally classification problems. Table 6 presents different fraud detection studies based on DL models. There are a number of studies focused on identifying credit card fraud. Heryadi et al. [114] developed several DL models for credit card fraud detection for Indonesian banks. They also analyzed the effects of the data imbalance between fraud and nonfraud data. In more recent studies, Roy et al. [115] used LSTM model for the credit card fraud detection, whereas in [116], the authors implemented DMLP networks to classify if a credit card transaction was fraudulent or not. Sohony et al. [117] used an ensemble of FFNN for the detection of card fraud. Jurgovsky et al. [118] used LSTM for detecting credit card fraud from credit card transaction sequences. They compared their results with RF. Paula et al. [119] used deep AE to implement anomaly de- tection to identify the financial fraud and money laundering for Brazilian companies on export tax claims. In a similar study, Gomes et al. [120] proposed an anomaly detection model that identified the anomalies in parliamentary expenditure spending in Brazilian elections using also deep AE. Wang et al. [121] used text mining and DMLP models for the detection of automobile insurance fraud. Longfei et al. [122] developed DMLP models to detect online payment transaction fraud. Costa et al. [123] used character sequences in financial transactions and the responses from the other side to detect if the transaction was fraud or not with LSTM. Goumagias et al. [124] used deep Q-learning (RL) to predict the risk-averse firms’ tax evasion   behaviors.   Finally,   they   provided   suggestions   for   the states to maximize their tax revenues accordingly.

---

12   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 6  Fraud detection studies. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [114]   Debit card transactions by a local Indonesia bank 2016–2017   Financial transaction amount on several time periods CNN, Stacked-LSTM, CNN-LSTM AUROC   – [115]   Credit card transactions from retail banking 2017   Transaction variables and several derived features LSTM, GRU   Accuracy   Keras [116]   Card purchases’ transactions 2014–2015   Probability of fraud per currency/origin country, other fraud related features DMLP   AUROC   – [117]   Transactions made with credit cards by European cardholders 2013   Personal financial variables to PCA DMLP, RF   Recall, Precision, Accuracy – [118]   Credit-card transactions   2015   Transaction and bank features LSTM   AUROC   Keras, Scikit-learn [119]   Databases of foreign trade of the Secretariat of Federal Revenue of Brazil 2014   8 Features: Foreign Trade, Tax, Transactions, Employees, Invoices, etc AE   MSE   H2O, R [120]   Chamber of Deputies open data, Companies data from Secretariat of Federal Revenue of Brazil 2009–2017   21 features: Brazilian State expense, party name, Type of expense, etc. Deep Autoencoders MSE, RMSE   H2O, R [121]   Real-world data for automobile insurance company labeled as fradulent –   Car, insurance and accident related features DMLP + LDA   TP, FP, Accuracy, Precision, F1-score – [122]   Transactions from a giant online payment platform 2006   Personal financial variables GBDT+DMLP   AUROC   – [123]   Financial transactions   –   Transaction data   LSTM   t-SNE   – [124]   Empirical data from Greek firms –   –   DQL   Revenue   Torch  4.3.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for fraud detection  Fraud Detection, more or less, has similar domain character- istics when compared with Risk Assessment, hence the corre- sponding model, feature and dataset selections were also highly correlated. As a result, the underlying dynamics that are valid for Risk Assessment are also applicable to Fraud Detection. Maybe, the only notable difference we can mention was the preferrence of the consumer data as the most preferred dataset instead of the credit data for Fraud Detection. Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the fraud detection implementations are presented in Figs. 10–12.  4.4. Portfolio management  Portfolio Management is the process of choosing various assets within the portfolio for a predetermined period. As seen in other financial applications, slightly different versions of this problem exist, even though the underlying motivation is the same. In general, Portfolio Management covers the following closely re- lated areas: Portfolio Optimization, Portfolio Selection, Portfolio Allocation. Sometimes, these terms are used interchangeably. Li et al. [125] reviewed the online portfolio selection studies using various rule-based or ML models. Portfolio Management is actually an optimization problem, identifying the best possible course-of-action for selecting the best-performing assets for a given period. As a result, there are a lot of EA models that were developed for this purpose. Metaxiotis et al. [126] surveyed the MOEAs implemented solely on the portfolio optimization problem. However, some DL researchers managed to configure it as a learning model and obtained supe- rior performances. Since Robo-advisory for portfolio management is on the rise, these DL implementations have the potential to have a far greater impact on the financial industry in the near future. Table 7 presents the portfolio management DL models and summarizes their achievements. There   are   a   number   of   stock   selection   implementations. Takeuchi et al. [127] classified the stocks in two classes, low momentum and high momentum depending on their expected return. They used a deep RBM encoder-classifier network and achieved high returns. Similarly, in [128], stocks were evaluated against their benchmark index to classify if they would outper- form or underperform using DMLP, then based on the predictions, adjusted the portfolio allocation weights for the stocks for en- hanced indexing. In [129], an ML framework including DMLP was constructed and the stock selection problem was implemented. Portfolio selection and smart indexing were the main focuses of [130] and [131] using AE and LSTM networks. Lin et al. [132] used the Elman network for optimal portfolio selection by pre- dicting the stock returns for t+1 and then constructing the opti- mum portfolio according to the returns. Meanwhile, Maknickiene

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   13  Table 7  Portfolio management studies. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [65]   Cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin   2014–2017   Price data   CNN, RNN, LSTM   Accumulative portfolio value, MDD, SR – [127]   Stocks from NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ 1965–2009   Price data   Autoencoder + RBM Accuracy, confusion matrix – [128]   20 stocks from S&P500   2012–2015   Technical indicators DMLP   Accuracy   Python, Scikit Learn, Keras, Theano [129]   Chinese stock data   2012–2013   Technical, fundamental data Logistic Regression, RF, DMLP AUC, accuracy, precision, recall, f1, tpr, fpr Keras, Tensorflow, Python, Scikit learn [130]   Top 5 companies in S&P500 –   Price data and Financial ratios LSTM, Auto-encoding, Smart indexing CAGR   – [131]   IBB biotechnology index, stocks 2012–2016   Price data   Auto-encoding, Calibrating, Validating, Verifying Returns   – [132]   Taiwans stock market   –   Price data   Elman RNN   MSE, return   – [133]   FOREX (EUR/USD, etc.), Gold 2013   Price data   Evolino RNN   Return   Python [134]   Stocks in NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ, TAQ intraday trade 1993–2017   Price, 15 firm characteristics LSTM+DMLP   Monthly return, SR   Python,Keras, Tensorflow in AWS [135]   S&P500   1985–2006   monthly and daily log-returns DBN+MLP   Validation, Test Error Theano, Python, Matlab [136]   10 stocks in S&P500   1997–2016   OCHLV, Price data   RNN, LSTM, GRU   Accuracy, Monthly return Keras, Tensorflow [137]   Analyst reports on the TSE and Osaka Exchange 2016–2018   Text   LSTM, CNN, Bi-LSTM Accuracy, R 2   R, Python, MeCab [138]   Stocks from Chinese/American stock market 2015–2018   OCHLV, Fundamental data DDPG, PPO   SR, MDD   – [139]   Hedge fund monthly return data 1996–2015   Return, SR, STD, Skewness, Kurtosis, Omega ratio, Fund alpha DMLP   Sharpe ratio, Annual return, Cum. return – [140]   12 most-volumed cryptocurrency 2015–2016   Price data   CNN + RL   SR, portfolio value, MDD –  et al. [141] used Evolino RNN for portfolio selection and re- turn prediction accordingly. The selected portfolio components (stocks) were orthogonal in nature. In [134], through predicting the next month’s return, top to be performed portfolios were constructed and good monthly returns were achieved with LSTM and LSTM-DMLP combined DL models. Similarly, Batres et al. [135] combined DBN and MLP for constructing a stock portfolio by predicting each stock’s monthly log-return and choosing the only stocks that were expected to perform better than the performance of the median stock. Lee et al. [136] compared 3 RNN models (S-RNN, LSTM, GRU) for stock price prediction and then constructed a threshold-based portfolio with selecting the stocks according to the predictions. With a dif- ferent approach, Iwasaki et al. [137] used the analyst reports for sentiment analyses through text mining and word embeddings and used the sentiment features as inputs to Deep Feedforward Neural Network (DFNN) model for the stock price prediction. After that, different portfolio selections were implemented based on the projected stock returns. DRL was selected   as   the   main   DL   model   for [138].   Liang et al. [138] used DRL for portfolio allocation by adjusting the stocks weights using various RL models. Chen et al. [139] com- pared different ML models (including DFFN) for hedge fund return prediction and hedge fund selection. DL and RF models had the best performance. Cryptocurrency portfolio management also started getting at- tention from DL researchers. In [140], portfolio management (al- location and adjustment of weights) was implemented by CNN and DRL on selected cryptocurrencies. Similarly, Jiang et al. [65] implemented cryptocurrency portfolio management (allocation) based on 3 different proposed models, namely RNN, LSTM and CNN.  4.4.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for portfolio manage- ment  In some ways, portfolio management can be considered simi- lar to algorithmic trading except the corresponding timeframes are very different. Algorithmic trading is implemented in rel- atively shorter durations, i.e. milliseconds to hours or days at most, meanwhile the typical timeframes for portfolio manage- ment are in the order of days, months or years. However, when we compare the models, features and datasets that were used for algorithmic trading studies, we saw, more or less, a very simi- lar pattern for portfolio management. Meanwhile, even though spatial properties or features were almost nonexistent for algo- rithmic trading models, there were a few spatial features and datasets that were used for portfolio management studies. Since most portfolio managers rely on analyst reports for their alloca- tion decisions, it is logical that some DL models also use similar features or datasets for training.

---

14   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 8  Asset pricing and derivatives market studies. Art.   Der. type   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [137]   Asset pricing Analyst reports on the TSE and Osaka Exchange 2016–2018   Text   LSTM, CNN, Bi-LSTM Accuracy, R 2   R, Python, MeCab [142]   Options   Simulated a range of call option prices –   Price data, option strike/maturity, dividend/risk free rates, volatility DMLP   RMSE, the average percentage pricing error Tensorflow [143]   Futures, Options TAIEX Options   2017   OCHLV, fundamental analysis, option price DMLP, DMLP with Black scholes RMSE, MAE, MAPE   – [144]   Equity returns Returns in NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ 1975–2017   57 firm characteristics Fama–French n-factor model DL R 2   ,RMSE   Tensorflow  Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the portfolio   management   implementations   are   presented   in Figs. 10–12.  4.5. Asset pricing and derivatives market (options, futures, forward contracts)  Accurate pricing or valuation of an asset is a fundamental study area in finance. There are a vast number of ML models developed for banks, corporates, real estate, derivative prod- ucts, etc. However, DL has not been applied to this particular field and there are some possible implementation areas that DL models can assist the asset pricing researchers or valuation experts. There were only a handful of studies that we were able to pinpoint within the DL and finance community. There are vast opportunities in this field for future studies and publications. Meanwhile, financial models based on derivative products is quite common. Options pricing, hedging strategy development, financial engineering with options, futures, forward contracts are among some of the studies that can benefit from developing DL models. Some recent studies indicate that researchers started showing interest in DL models that can provide solutions to this complex and challenging field. Table 8 summarizes these studies with their intended purposes. Iwasaki et al. [137] used a DFNN model and the analyst reports for sentiment analyses to predict the stock prices. Different port- folio selection approaches were implemented after the prediction of the stock prices. Culkin et al. [142] proposed a novel method that used DMLP model to predict option prices by comparing their results with Black & Scholes option pricing formula. Similarly, Hsu et al. [143] proposed a novel method that predicted TAIEX option prices using bid–ask spreads and Black & Scholes option price model parameters with 3-layer DMLP. In [144], characteristic fea- tures such as Asset growth, Industry momentum, Market equity, Market Beta, etc. were used as inputs to a Fama–French n-factor model DL to predict US equity returns in National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations (NASDAQ), Ameri- can Stock Exchange (AMEX), New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) indices.  4.5.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for derivatives market  There are a lot of options studies with machine learning, mostly pricing and volatility estimation research. Meanwhile, when compared with the other areas of finance, this area can still be considered mostly untouched, since it did not attract the researchers from a wider perspective. The other derivative products are even more scarce compared to the options. The trend still continues for the deep learning era. There might be several reasons behind this scarcity of pub- lications for derivative products: Lack of openly available his- toric data, the implicit ambiguity using the implied volatility for options pricing, the price irregularities at the tail-ends for the options, too many possibilities for complex formations result- ing in too many potential features to consider, etc. Hence the intrinsic dynamics are quite complex in the derivatives market. Even though not many academic papers are published, one might think the financial institutions and their quantitative strategy development departments might be working on these products without publishing their results. This is probably a valid concern, meanwhile these firms may be reluctant to openly publish their models to the public for business protection, so it might not be possible to find openly accessible studies on this topic as easy as the other financial application areas. However, this is an ex- citing area with tremendous opportunities for professionals and researchers, but the readers should carefully assess the rewards and risks associated with the model development using these highly volatile and often complex products. Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the derivatives market implementations are presented in Figs. 10–12.  4.6. Cryptocurrency and blockchain studies  In the last few years, cryptocurrencies have been very pop- ular due to their incredible price gain and loss within short periods. Even though price forecasting dominates the area of interest, some other studies also exist, such as cryptocurrency Algo-trading models. Meanwhile, Blockchain is a new technology that provides a distributed decentralized ledger system that fits well with the cryptocurrency world. As a matter of fact, cryptocurrency and blockchain are highly coupled, even though blockchain technol- ogy has a much wider span for various implementation possibil- ities that need to be studied. It is still in its early development phase, hence there is a lot of hype in its potentials. Some DL models have already appeared about cryptocurrency studies, mostly price prediction or trading systems. However, still there is a lack of studies for blockchain research within the DL community. Given the attention that the underlying technology has attracted, there is a great chance that some new studies will start appearing in the near future. Table 9 tabulates the studies for the cryptocurrency and blockchain research. Chen et al. [145] proposed a blockchain transaction trace- ability algorithm using Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy cognitive map and 3-layer DMLP. Bitcoin data (Hash value, bitcoin address, pub- lic/private key, digital signature, etc.) was used as the dataset. Nan et al. [146] proposed a method for bitcoin mixing detection that consisted of different stages: Constructing the Bitcoin transaction graph, implementing node embedding, detecting outliers through AE. Lopes et al. [147] combined the opinion market and price pre- diction for cryptocurrency trading. Text mining combined with 2 models, CNN and LSTM were used to extract the opinion. Bitcoin, Litecoin, StockTwits were used as the dataset. Open,Close,High,

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   15  Table 9  Cryptocurrency and blockchain studies. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [46]   Bitcoin, Dash, Ripple, Monero, Litecoin, Dogecoin, Nxt, Namecoin 2014–2017   MA, BOLL, the CRIX daily returns, Euribor interest rates, OCHLV of EURO/UK, EURO/USD, US/JPY LSTM, RNN, DMLP   Accuracy, F1-measure Python, Tensorflow [65]   Cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin   2014–2017   Price data   CNN   Accumulative portfolio value, MDD, SR – [140]   12 most-volumed cryptocurrency 2015–2016   Price data   CNN + RL   SR, portfolio value, MDD [145]   Bitcoin data   2010–2017   Hash value, bitcoin address, public/private key, digital signature, etc. Takagi–Sugeno Fuzzy cognitive maps Analytical hierarchy process – [146]   Bitcoin data   2012, 2013, 2016   TransactionId, input/output Addresses, timestamp Graph embedding using heuristic, laplacian eigen-map, deep AE F1-score   – [147]   Bitcoin, Litecoin, StockTwits 2015–2018   OCHLV, technical indicators, sentiment analysis CNN, LSTM, State Frequency Model MSE   Keras, Tensorflow [148]   Bitcoin   2013–2016   Price data   Bayesian optimized RNN, LSTM Sensitivity, specificity, precision, accuracy, RMSE Keras, Python, Hyperas  Low, Volume (OCHLV) of prices, technical indicators, and sen- timent analysis were used as the feature set. In another study, Jiang et al. [65] presented a financial-model-free RL framework for the Cryptocurrency portfolio management that was based on 3 different proposed models, basic RNN, LSTM and CNN. In [140], portfolio management was implemented by CNN and DRL on 12 most-volumed cryptocurrencies. Bitcoin, Ethereum, Bitcoin Cash and Digital Cash were used as the dataset. In addition, Spilak et al. [46] used 8 cryptocurrencies (Bitcoin, Dash, Ripple, Mon- ero, Litecoin, Dogecoin, Nxt, Namecoin) to construct a dynamic portfolio using LSTM, RNN, DMLP methods. McNally et al. [148] compared Bayesian optimized RNN, LSTM and Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) to predict the bitcoin price direction. Sensitivity, specificity, precision, accuracy, Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) were used as the performance metrics.  4.6.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for cryptocurrency and blockchain studies  Since most of the cryptocurrency studies were focused on cryptocurrency price forecasting or trading systems, the choice of models and features are similar to the algotrading selections. Meanwhile in some studies ( [145] and [146]) cryptocurrency specific features were selected. Also, for the datasets, the price data of the most popular cryptocurrency coins were used. Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the cryptocurrency implementations are presented in Figs. 10–12.  4.7. Financial sentiment analysis and behavioral finance  One of the most important components of behavioral finance is emotion or investor sentiment. Lately, advancements in text mining techniques opened up the possibilities for successful sen- timent extraction through social media feeds. There is a growing interest in Financial Sentiment Analysis, especially for trend fore- casting and Algo-trading model development. Kearney et al. [149] surveyed ML-based financial sentiment analysis studies that use textual data. Nowadays there is broad interest in the sentiment analysis for financial forecasting research using DL models. Ta- ble 10 provides information about the sentiment analysis stud- ies that are focused on financial forecasting and based on text mining. In [150], technical analysis (MACD, Moving Average (MA), Directional Movement Index (DMI), Exponential Moving Average (EMA), Triple Exponential Moving Average (TEMA), Momentum, RSI, Commodity Channel Index (CCI), Stochastic Oscillator, Price of Change (ROC)) and sentiment analysis (using social media) were used to predict the price of stocks. Shi et al. [151] pro- posed a method that visually interpreted text-based DL models in predicting the stock price movements. They used the finan- cial news from Reuters and Bloomberg. In [152], text mining and word embeddings were used to extract information from the financial news from Reuters and Bloomberg to predict the stock price movements. In addition, in [153], the prices of index data and emotional data from text posts were used to predict the stock opening price of the next day. Wang [154] performed classification and stock price prediction using text and price data. Das et al. [155] used Twitter sentiment data and stock price data to predict the prices of Google, Microsoft and Apple stocks. Prosky et al. [156] performed sentiment, mood prediction using news from Reuters and used these sentiments for price prediction. Li et al. [157] used sentiment classification (neutral, positive, negative) for the stock open or close price prediction with LSTM (various models). They compared their results with SVM and achieved higher overall performance. Iwasaki et al. [137] used an- alyst reports for sentiment analysis through text mining and word embeddings. They used the sentiment features as inputs to DFNN model for price prediction. Finally, different portfolio selections were implemented based on the projected stock returns. In a different study, Huang et al. [158] used several models including Hidden Markov Model (HMM), DMLP and CNN using Twitter moods along with the financial price data for prediction of the next day’s move (up or down). CNN achieved the best result.

---

16   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 10  Financial sentiment studies coupled with text mining for forecasting. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [137]   Analyst reports on the TSE and Osaka Exchange 2016–2018   Text   LSTM, CNN, Bi-LSTM Accuracy, R 2   R, Python, MeCab [150]   Sina Weibo, Stock market records 2012–2015   Technical indicators, sentences DRSE   F1-score, precision, recall, accuracy, AUROC Python [151]   News from Reuters and Bloomberg for S&P500 stocks 2006–2015   Financial news, price data DeepClue   Accuracy   Dynet software [152]   News from Reuters and Bloomberg, Historical stock security data 2006–2013   News, price data   DMLP   Accuracy   – [153]   SCI prices   2008–2015   OCHL of change rate, price Emotional Analysis + LSTM MSE   – [154]   SCI prices   2013–2016   Text data and Price data LSTM   Accuracy, F1-Measure Python, Keras [155]   Stocks of Google, Microsoft and Apple 2016–2017   Twitter sentiment and stock prices RNN   –   Spark, Flume,Twitter API, [156]   30 DJIA stocks, S&P500, DJI, news from Reuters 2002–2016   Price data and features from news articles LSTM, NN, CNN and word2vec Accuracy   VADER [157]   Stocks of CSI300 index, OCHLV of CSI300 index 2009–2014   Sentiment Posts, Price data Naive Bayes + LSTM Precision, Recall, F1-score, Accuracy Python, Keras [158]   S&P500, NYSE Composite, DJIA, NASDAQ Composite 2009–2011   Twitter moods, index data DNN, CNN   Error rate   Keras, Theano  Even though financial sentiment is highly coupled with text mining, we decided to represent those two topics in different subsections. The main reason for such a choice is not only the ex- istence of some financial sentiment studies which do not directly depend on financial textual data (like [158]) but also the existence of some financial text mining studies that are not automatically used for sentiment analysis which will be covered in Section 4.8.  4.7.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for financial sentiment analysis  Financial sentiment analysis is mostly used along with fi- nancial text mining and algotrading models. As a result, the model choices were highly correlated with the aforementioned financial application areas. Meanwhile, even though the model choices were highly similar, there were significant differences in the feature and dataset choices. For the features, text re- lated ones such as extracted text from various sources like mi- croblogs, news, reports dominated the studies. Also some papers directly used the sentiment feature extracted through APIs. The rest of the used features were similar to the algotrading features, like price data and technical indicators. For the datasets, news and tweet/microblog repositories were the most popular choices. However, stock and index datasets were also used. There were also some studies that used financial reports as their data sources. Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the financial sentiment analysis implementations are presented in Figs. 10–12.  4.8. Financial text mining  With the rapid spreading of social media and real-time stream- ing news/tweets, instant text-based information retrieval became available for financial model development. As a result, finan- cial text mining studies became very popular in recent years. Even though some of these studies are directly interested in the sentiment analysis through crowdsourcing, there are a lot of implementations that are interested in the content retrieval of news, financial statements, disclosures, etc. through analyzing the text context. There are a few ML surveys focused on text mining and news analytics. Among the noteworthy studies of such, Mitra et al. [159] edited a book on news analytics in finance, whereas Li et al. [160], Loughran et al. [161], Kumar et al. [162] surveyed the studies of textual analysis of financial documents, news and corporate disclosures. It is worth to mention that there are also some studies [163,164] of text mining for financial prediction models. Previous section was focused on DL models using sentiment analysis specifically tailored for the financial forecasting imple- mentations, whereas this section will include DL studies that have text Mining without Sentiment Analysis for Forecasting (Table 11), financial sentiment analysis coupled with text mining without forecasting intent (Table 12) and finally other text mining implementations (Table 13), respectively. Huynh et al. [165] used the financial news from Reuters, Bloomberg and stock prices data to predict the stock move- ments in the future. In [166], different event-types on Chinese companies are classified based on a novel event-type pattern classification algorithm. Besides, the stock prices were predicted using additional inputs. Kraus et al. [167] implemented LSTM with transfer learning using text mining through financial news and stock market data. Dang et al. [168] used Stock2Vec and Two- stream GRU (TGRU) models to generate the input data from the financial news and stock prices for classification. In [169], events were detected from Reuters and Bloomberg news through text mining. The extracted information was used for price prediction and stock trading with the CNN model. Vargas et al. [170] used text mining and price prediction together for intraday directional movement estimation. Akita et al. [171] im- plemented a method that used text mining and price prediction together for forecasting prices. Verma et al. [172] combined news data with financial data to classify the stock price movement. Bari et al. [68] used text mining for extracting information from the tweets and news. In the method, time series models were used for stock trade signal generation. In [173], a method that performed

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   17  Table 11  Text mining studies without sentiment analysis for forecasting. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [68]   Energy-Sector/ Company-Centric Tweets in S&P500 2015–2016   Text and Price data RNN, KNN, SVR, LinR Return, SR, precision, recall, accuracy Python, Tweepy API [165]   News from Reuters, Bloomberg 2006–2013   Financial news, price data Bi-GRU   Accuracy   Python, Keras [166]   News from Sina.com, ACE2005 Chinese corpus 2012–2016   A set of news text   Their unique algorithm Precision, Recall, F1-score – [167]   CDAX stock market data   2010–2013   Financial news, stock market data LSTM   MSE, RMSE, MAE, Accuracy, AUC TensorFlow, Theano, Python, Scikit-Learn [168]   Apple, Airbus, Amazon news from Reuters, Bloomberg, S&P500 stock prices 2006–2013   Price data, news, technical indicators TGRU, stock2vec   Accuracy, precision, AUROC Keras, Python [169]   S&P500 Index, 15 stocks in S&P500 2006–2013   News from Reuters and Bloomberg CNN   Accuracy, MCC   – [170]   S&P500 index news from Reuters 2006–2013   Financial news titles, Technical indicators SI-RCNN (LSTM + CNN) Accuracy   – [171]   10 stocks in Nikkei 225 and news 2001–2008   Textual information and Stock prices Paragraph Vector + LSTM Profit   – [172]   NIFTY50 Index, NIFTY Bank/Auto/IT/Energy Index, News 2013–2017   Index data, news   LSTM   MCC, Accuracy   – [173]   Price data, index data, news, social media data 2015   Price data, news from articles and social media Coupled matrix and tensor Accuracy, MCC   Jieba [174]   HS300   2015–2017   Social media news, price data RNN-Boost with LDA Accuracy, MAE, MAPE, RMSE Python, Scikit-learn [175]   News and Chinese stock data 2014–2017   Selected words in a news HAN   Accuracy, Annual return – [176]   News, stock prices from Hong Kong Stock Exchange 2001   Price data and TF-IDF from news ELM, DLR, PCA, BELM, KELM, NN Accuracy   Matlab [177]   TWSE index, 4 stocks in TWSE 2001–2017   Technical indicators, Price data, News CNN + LSTM   RMSE, Profit   Keras, Python, TALIB [178]   Stock of Tsugami Corporation 2013   Price data   LSTM   RMSE   Keras, Tensorflow [179]   News, Nikkei Stock Average and 10-Nikkei companies 1999–2008   news, MACD   RNN, RBM+DBN   Accuracy,   P -value   – [180]   ISMIS 2017 Data Mining Competition dataset –   Expert identifier, classes LSTM + GRU + FFNN Accuracy   – [181]   Reuters, Bloomberg News, S&P500 price 2006–2013   News and sentences LSTM   Accuracy   – [182]   APPL from S&P500 and news from Reuters 2011–2017   Input news, OCHLV, Technical indicators CNN + LSTM, CNN+SVM Accuracy, F1-score   Tensorflow [183]   Nikkei225, S&P500, news from Reuters and Bloomberg 2001–2013   Stock price data and news DGM   Accuracy, MCC, %profit – [184]   Stocks from S&P500   2006–2013   Text (news) and Price data LAR+News, RF+News MAPE, RMSE   –  information fusion from news and social media sources was proposed to predict the trend of the stocks. In [174], social media news were used to predict the index price and the index direction with RNN-Boost through Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) features. Hu et al. [175] proposed a novel method that used text mining techniques and Hybrid At- tention Networks based on the financial news for forecasting the trend of stocks. Li et al. [176] implemented intraday stock price direction classification using the financial news and stocks prices. In [177], financial news data and word embedding with Word2vec were implemented to create the inputs for Recurrent CNN (RCNN) to predict the stock price. Minami et al. [178] proposed a method that predicted the stock price with corporate action event information and macro- economic index data using LSTM. In [179], a novel method that used a combination of RBM, DBN and word embeddings to create

---

18   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 12  Financial sentiment studies coupled with text mining without forecasting. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria Env. [85]   883 BHC from EDGAR   2006–2017   Tokens, weighted sentiment polarity, leverage and ROA CNN, LSTM, SVM, Random Forest Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-score Keras, Python, Scikit-learn [185]   SemEval-2017 dataset, financial text, news, stock market data 2017   Sentiments in Tweets, News headlines Ensemble SVR, CNN, LSTM, GRU Cosine similarity score, agreement score, class score Python, Keras, Scikit Learn [186]   Financial news from Reuters 2006–2015   Word vector, Lexical and Contextual input Targeted dependency tree LSTM Cumulative abnormal return – [187]   Stock sentiment analysis from StockTwits 2015   StockTwits messages LSTM, Doc2Vec, CNN Accuracy, precision, recall, f-measure, AUC – [188]   Sina Weibo, Stock market records 2012–2015   Technical indicators, sentences DRSE   F1-score, precision, recall, accuracy, AUROC Python [189]   News from NowNews, AppleDaily, LTN, MoneyDJ for 18 stocks 2013–2014   Text, Sentiment   LSTM, CNN   Return   Python, Tensorflow [190]   StockTwits   2008–2016   Sentences, StockTwits messages CNN, LSTM, GRU   MCC, WSURT   Keras, Tensorflow [191]   Financial statements of Japan companies –   Sentences, text   DMLP   Precision, recall, f-score – [192]   Twitter posts, news headlines –   Sentences, text   Deep-FASP   Accuracy, MSE, R 2   – [193]   Forums data   2004–2013   Sentences and keywords Recursive neural tensor networks Precision, recall, f-measure – [194]   News from Financial Times related US stocks –   Sentiment of news headlines SVR, Bidirectional LSTM Cosine similarity   Python, Scikit Learn, Keras, Tensorflow  Table 13  Other text mining studies. Art.   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria  Env.  [72]   News from NowNews, AppleDaily, LTN, MoneyDJ for 18 stocks 2013–2014   Text, Sentiment   DMLP   Return   Python, Tensorflow [86]   The event data set for large European banks, news articles from Reuters 2007–2014   Word, sentence   DMLP +NLP preprocess Relative usefulness, F1-score – [87]   Event dataset on European banks, news from Reuters 2007–2014   Text, sentence   Sentence vector + DFFN Usefulness, F1-score, AUROC – [88]   News from Reuters, fundamental data 2007–2014   Financial ratios and news text doc2vec + NN   Relative usefulness   Doc2vec [121]   Real-world data for automobile insurance company labeled as fradulent –   Car, insurance and accident related features DMLP + LDA   TP, FP, Accuracy, Precision, F1-score – [123]   Financial transactions   –   Transaction data   LSTM   t-SNE   – [195]   Taiwan’s National Pension Insurance 2008–2014   Insured’s id, area-code, gender, etc. RNN   Accuracy, total error Python [196]   StockTwits   2015–2016   Sentences, StockTwits messages Doc2vec, CNN   Accuracy, precision, recall, f-measure, AUC Python, Tensorflow  word vectors for RNN-RBM-DBN network was proposed to pre- dict the stock prices. Buczkowski et al. [180] proposed a novel method that used expert recommendations, ensemble of GRU and LSTM for prediction of the prices. In [181] a novel method that used character-based neural language model using financial news and LSTM was proposed. Liu et al. [182] proposed a method that used word embeddings with word2Vec, technical analysis features and stock prices for price prediction. In [183], Deep Neural Generative Model (DGM) with news articles using Paragraph Vector algorithm was used for cre- ation of the input vector to predict the stock prices. In [184], the stock price data and word embeddings were used for stock price

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   19  Table 14  Other - theoretical or conceptual studies. Art.   SubTopic   IsTimeSeries?   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method [197]   Analysis of AE, SVD   Yes   Selected stocks from the IBB index and stock of Amgen Inc. 2012–2014   Price data   AE, SVD [198]   Fraud Detection in Banking No   Risk Management / Fraud Detection –   –   DRL  prediction. The results showed that the extracted information from embedding news improves the performance. Rawte et al. [85] tried to solve three separate problems using CNN, LSTM, SVM, RF: Bank risk classification, sentiment analy- sis and Return on Assets (ROA) regression. Akhtar et al. [185] compared CNN, LSTM and GRU based DL models against MLP for financial sentiment analysis. Chang et al. [186] implemented the estimation of information content polarity (negative/positive effect) with text mining, word vector, lexical, contextual input and various LSTM models. They used the financial news from Reuters. Jangid et al. [187] proposed a novel method that is a com- bination of LSTM and CNN for word embedding and sentiment analysis using Bidirectional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) for aspect extraction. The proposed method used multichannel CNN for financial sen- timent analysis. Shijia et al. [188] used an attention-based LSTM for the financial sentiment analysis using news headlines and mi- croblog messages. Sohangir et al. [189] used LSTM, doc2vec, CNN and stock market opinions posted in StockTwits for sentiment analysis. Mahmoudi et al. [190] extracted tweets from StockTwits to identify the user sentiment. In the evaluation approach, they also used emojis for the sentiment analysis. Kitamori et al. [191] extracted the sentiments from financial news and used DMLP to classify positive and negative news. In [192], the sentiment/aspect prediction was implemented using an ensemble of LSTM, CNN and GRU networks. In a different study, Li et al. [193] proposed a DL based sentiment analysis method using RNN to identify the top sellers in the underground economy. Moore et al. [194] used text mining techniques for sentiment analysis from the financial news. In [195], individual social security payment types (paid, un- paid, repaid, transferred) were classified and predicted using LSTM, HMM and SVM. Sohangir et al. [196] used two neural network models (doc2Vec, CNN) to find the top authors in Stock- Twits messages and to classify the authors as expert or non- expert for author classification purposes. In [123], the character sequences in financial transactions and the responses from the other side was used to detect if the transaction was fraud or not with LSTM. Wang et al. [121] used text mining and DMLP models to detect automobile insurance fraud. In [86], the news semantics were extracted by the word se- quence learning, bank stress was determined and classified with the associated events. Day et al. [72] used financial sentiment analysis using text mining and DMLP for stock algorithmic trad- ing. Cerchiello et al. [88] used the fundamental data and text mining from the financial news (Reuters) to classify the bank distress. In [87], the bank distress was identified by extracting the data from the financial news through text mining. The proposed method used DFNN on semantic sentence vectors to classify if there was an event or not.  4.8.1. Model, feature and dataset selections for financial text mining  Financial text mining is highly correlated with financial senti- ment analysis. So, most of the highlights described for financial sentiment analysis are also valid for financial text mining. Full distribution of models, features and datasets used by the financial text mining implementations are presented in Figs. 10–12.  4.9. Theoretical or conceptual studies  There were a number of research papers that were either focused on the theoretical concepts of finance or the conceptual designs without model implementation phases; however they still provided valuable information, so we decided to include them in our survey. In Table 14, these studies were tabulated according to their topic of interest. In [197], the connection between deep AEs and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) were discussed and compared using stocks from iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology ETF (IBB) index and the stock of Amgen Inc. Bouchti et al. [198] explained the details of DRL and mentioned that DRL could be used for fraud detection/risk management in banking.  4.10. Other financial applications  Finally, there were some research papers which did not fit into any of the previously covered topics. Their data set and intended output were different than most of the other studies focused in this survey. These studies include social security payment classification, bank telemarketing success prediction, hardware solutions for faster financial transaction processing, etc. There were some anomaly detection implementations like tax evasion, money laundering that could have been included in this group; however we decided to cover them in a different subsection, fraud detection. Table 15 shows all these aforementioned studies with their differences. Dixon et al. [199] used Intel Xeon Phi to speedup the price movement direction prediction problem using DFFN. The main contribution of the study was the increase in the speed of pro- cessing. Alberg et al. [200] used several company financials data (fundamental data) and price together to predict the next period’s company financials data. Kim et al. [201] used CNN for predicting the success of bank telemarketing. In their study, they used the phone calls of the bank marketing data and 16 finance-related attributes. Lee et al. [202] used technical indicators and patent information to estimate the revenue and profit for the corporates using RBM based DBN, FFNN and Support Vector Regressor (SVR). Ying et al. [195] classified and predicted individual social security payment types (paid, unpaid, repaid, transferred) using LSTM, HMM and SVM. Li et al. [193] proposed a deep learning- based sentiment analysis method to identify the top sellers in the underground economy. Jeong et al. [47] combined deep Q- learning and deep NN to implement a model to solve three separate problems: Increasing profit in a market, prediction of the number of shares to trade, and preventing overfitting with insufficient financial data.  5. Current snaphot of DL research for financial applications  For the survey, we reviewed 144 papers from various financial application areas. Each paper is analyzed according to its topic, publication type, problem type, method, dataset, feature set and performance criteria. Due to space limitations, we will only pro- vide the general summary statistics indicating the current state of the DL for finance research.

---

20   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Table 15  Other financial applications. Art.   Subtopic   Data set   Period   Feature set   Method   Performance criteria   Env. [47]   Improving trading decisions S&P500, KOSPI, HSI, and EuroStoxx50 1987–2017   200-days stock price   Deep Q-Learning and DMLP Total profit, Correlation – [193]   Identifying Top Sellers In Underground Economy Forums data   2004–2013   Sentences and keywords Recursive neural tensor networks Precision, recall, f-measure – [195]   Predicting Social Ins. Payment Behavior Taiwan’s National Pension Insurance 2008–2014   Insured’s id, area-code, gender, etc. RNN   Accuracy, total error   Python [199]   Speedup   45 CME listed commodity and FX futures 1991–2014   Price data   DNN   –   – [200]   Forecasting Fundamentals Stocks in NYSE, NASDAQ or AMEX exchanges 1970–2017   16 fundamental features from balance sheet DMLP, LFM   MSE, Compound annual return, SR – [201]   Predicting Bank Telemarketing Phone calls of bank marketing data 2008–2010   16 finance-related attributes CNN   Accuracy   – [202]   Corporate Performance Prediction 22 pharmaceutical companies data in US stock market 2000–2015   11 financial and 4 patent indicator RBM, DBN   RMSE, profit   –  Fig. 8.   The histogram of publication count in topics.  First and foremost, we clustered the various topics within the financial applications research and presented them in Fig. 8. A quick glance at the figure shows us financial text mining and algorithmic trading are the top two fields that the researchers most worked on followed by risk assessment, sentiment analysis, portfolio management and fraud detection, respectively. The re- sults indicate most of the papers were published within the past 3 years implying the domain is very hot and actively studied. When the papers were clustered by the DL model type as presented in Fig. 9, we observe the dominance of RNN, DMLP and CNN over the remaining models, which might be expected, since these models are the most commonly preferred ones in general DL implementations. Meanwhile, RNN is a general um- brella model which has several versions including LSTM, GRU, etc. Within the RNN choice, most of the models actually belonged to LSTM, which is very popular in time series forecasting or regression problems. It is also used quite often in algorithmic trading. More than 70% of the RNN papers consisted of LSTM models. Meanwhile, DMLP generally fits well for classification prob- lems; hence it is a common choice for most of the financial application areas. However, since it is a natural extension of its shallow counterpart MLP, it has a longer history than the other DL models. CNN started getting more attention lately since most of the implementations appeared within the past 3 years. Careful anal- ysis of CNN papers indicates that a recent trend of representing financial data with a 2-D image view in order to utilize CNN is growing. Hence CNN based models might overpass the other models in the future. It actually passed DMLP for the past 3 years. Furthermore, we attempted to provide more details about associations between the DL models and the financial application areas. Fig. 10 gives the distribution of the models for the research areas through a model-topic heatmap. Since most of the papers had multiple DL models, the amount of models is more than the number of covered papers. The results indicate the broad acceptance of RNN, DMLP and CNN models in almost all financial application areas. We also wanted to elaborate on the particular feature se- lections for each financial application area to see if we could spot any pattern. Fig. 11 gives the distribution of the features for the research areas through a feature-topic heatmap. Unlike

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   21  Fig. 9.   The histogram of publication count in model types.  Fig. 10.   Topic-model heatmap.  the model-topic heatmap, in this case, we saw a distinction between the associations. Even though price data and technical indicators have been very popular for most of the research areas that are involved with time series forecasting, like algorithmic trading, portfolio management, financial sentiment analysis and financial text mining, the studies that had more significant spatial characteristics like risk assessment and fraud detection did not depend much on these temporal features. One other noteworthy difference came up with the adaptation of text related features. Highly text-based applications like financial sentiment analysis, financial text mining, risk assessment and fraud detection pre- ferred to use features like text (extracted from tweets, news or financial data) and sentiments during their model development and implementation. However, the temporal characteristics of the financial time series data were also important for financial sentiment analysis and financial text mining, since a significant portion of these models were integrated into algorithmic trading systems. Fig. 12 elaborates on the distribution of the dataset types for the research areas through a dataset-topic heatmap. If we analyze the heatmap, we see similarities with the feature-topic associa- tions. However, this time, we had three main clusters of dataset types, the first one being the temporal datasets like Stock, Index, ETF, Cryptocurrency, Forex and Commodity price datasets, and the second one being the text-based datasets like News, Tweets, Microblogs and Financial Reports, and the last one being the datasets that had both numeric and textual components like Con- sumer Data, Credit Data and Financial Reports from companies or analysts. As far as the dataset vs. application area associations are concerned, these three main clusters were distributed as follows: Stock, Index, Cryptocurrency, ETF datasets were used almost in every application area except Risk Assessment and Fraud Detec- tion which had less of temporal properties. Meanwhile, Credit Data, Financial Reports and Consumer Data were particularly used by these two application areas, namely Risk Assessment and Fraud Detection. Lastly, pure text based datasets like news, tweets, microblogs were preferred by Financial Sentiment Analy- sis and Financial Text Mining studies. However, as was the case in the feature-topic associations, temporal datasets like stock, ETF, Index price datasets were also used with these studies since some of them were tied with algorithmic trading models.  6. Discussion and open issues  After reviewing all the publications based on the selected cri- teria explained in the previous section, we wanted to provide our findings of the current state-of-the-art situation. Our discussions are categorized by the DL models and implementation topics.  6.1. Discussions on DL models  It is possible to claim that LSTM is the dominant DL model that is preferred by most researchers, due to its well-established structure for financial time series data forecasting. Most of the fi- nancial implementations have time-varying data representations requiring regression-type approaches which fits very well for LSTM and its derivatives due to their easy adaptations to the problems. As long as the temporal nature of the financial data remains, LSTM and its related family models will maintain their popularities. Meanwhile, CNN based models started getting more traction among researchers in the last two years. Unlike LSTM, CNN works better for classification problems and is more suitable for either non-time varying or static data representations. However, since most financial data is time-varying, under normal circumstances,

---

22   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  Fig. 11.   Topic-feature heatmap.  Fig. 12.   Topic-dataset heatmap.  CNN is not the natural choice for financial applications. However, in some independent studies, the researchers performed an inno- vative transformation of 1-D time-varying financial data into 2-D mostly stationary image-like data to be able to utilize the power of CNN through adaptive filtering and implicit dimensionality reduction. This novel approach seems working remarkably well in complex financial patterns regardless of the application area. In the future, more examples of such implementations might be more common; only time will tell. Another model that has a rising interest is DRL based im- plementations; in particular, the ones coupled with agent-based modeling. Even though algorithmic trading is the most preferred implementation area for such models, it is possible to develop the working structures for any problem type. Careful analyses of the reviews indicate in most of the papers hybrid models are preferred over native models for better ac- complishments. A lot of researchers configure the topologies and network parameters for achieving higher performance. However, there is also the danger of creating more complex hybrid models that are not easy to build, and their interpretation also might be difficult. Through the performance evaluation results, it is possible to claim that in general terms, DL models outperform ML coun- terparts when working on the same problems. DL models also have the advantage of being able to work on larger amount of data. With the growing expansion of open-source DL libraries and frameworks, DL model building and development process is easier than ever.

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   23  Also it is worth to mention that, besides the outperformance of DL models over ML, the performance evaluation results are improving every year relatively, even though it is very difficult to explicitly quantify the amount of improvement. The improve- ments are most notable in trend prediction based algo-trading implementations and text-mining studies due to deeper and/or more versatile networks and new innovative model develop- ments. This is also reflected through the increasing number of published papers year over year.  6.2. Discussions on implementation areas  Price/trend prediction and Algo-trading models have the most interest among all financial applications that use DL models in their implementations. Risk assessment and portfolio manage- ment have always been popular within the ML community, and it looks like this is also valid for DL researchers. Even though broad interest in DL models is on the rise, fi- nancial text mining is particularly getting more attention than most of the other financial applications. The streaming flow of financial news, tweets, statements, blogs opened up a whole new world for the financial community allowing them to build better and more versatile prediction and evaluation models in- tegrating numerical and textual data. Meanwhile, the general approach nowadays is to combine text mining with financial sentiment analysis. With that, it is reasonable to assume higher performance will be achieved. A lot of researchers started work- ing on that particular application area. It is quite probable that the next generation of outperforming implementations will be based on models that can successfully integrate text mining with quantified numerical data. These days, one other hot area within the DL research is the cryptocurrencies. We can also include blockchain research to that, even though it is not necessarily directly related to cryptocur- rencies, but generally used together in most implementations. Cryptocurrency price prediction has the most attraction within the field, but since the topic is fairly new, more studies and implementations will probably keep pouring in due to the high expectations and promising rewards.  6.3. Open issues and future work  When we try to extrapolate the current state of research and the achieved accomplishments into the future, a few areas of interests stand out. We will try to elaborate on them and provide a pathway for what can be done or needs to be done within the following few years. We will try to sort out our opinions by analyzing them through the model development and research topic point of view.  6.3.1. Model development perspective  We have already mentioned the growing attention on the adaptation of 2-D CNN implementations for various financial application areas. This particular technique looks promising and provides opportunities. It would be beneficial to further explore the possibilities using that approach in different problems. The playfield is still wide open. Graph CNN is another model that is closely related but still showing some discrepancies. It has not been used much, only one study was published that relates graph-CNN with financial appli- cations. However, versatile transformations of financial data into graphs, integrating sentiment analysis through graph representa- tions and constructing different models can create opportunities for researchers to build better performing financial applications. There are also recently developed DL models, like GAN, Cap- sule networks, etc. that can also provide viable alternatives to existing implementations. They have started showing up in vari- ous non-financial studies, however to the best of our knowledge, no known implementation of such kind for financial applications exists. It might open up a new window of opportunities for finan- cial researchers and practitioners. In addition to such new models, innovative paradigms like transfer learning, one-shot learning can be tested within the environment. Since financial text mining is overtaking the other topics in an accelerated fashion, new data models like Stock2Vec [168] can be enhanced for better and more representative models. In addition, Natural Language Processing (NLP) based ensemble models or more integration of data semantics into the picture can increase the accuracy of the existing models. Finally, according to our observations, hybrid models are pre- ferred more over the native or standalone models in most studies. This trend will likely continue, however, researchers need to introduce more versatile, sometimes unconventional models for better results. Hybrid models integrating various simple DL layers like cascaded CNN-LSTM blocks can have better outcomes since ensembling spatial and temporal information together in a novel way might be an important milestone for researchers seeking for ‘‘alpha’’ in their models.  6.3.2. Implementation perspective  As far as the application areas are concerned, the usual sus- pects, algorithmic trading, portfolio management and risk as- sessment will probably continue on their dominance within the financial research arena in the foreseeable future. Meanwhile, some new shining stars started getting more attention, not only because they represent fairly new research opportunities, but also their forecasted impact on the financial world is noteworthy. Cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology are among these new research areas. Hence, it is worthwhile to explore the pos- sibilities that these new fields will bring. It will be a while before any of these technologies become widely accepted indus- try standard, however, that is the sole reason why it provides a great opportunity for the researchers to shape the future of the financial world with new innovative models and hoping that the rest of the world will follow their footsteps. Another area that can benefit from more innovative mod- els is portfolio management. Robo-advisory systems are on the rise throughout the world and these systems depend on high performing automated decision support systems. Since DL mod- els fit well to that description, it would be logical to assume the utilization of DL implementations will increase in the com- ing years. As such, the corresponding quant funds will be very interested in the achievements that the DL researchers can of- fer for the financial community. This might require integrating learning and optimization models together for better-performing systems. Hence, ensemble models that can successfully mix EC and DL components might be what the industry is anticipating for the immediate future. This might also result in new research opportunities. Yet, one other research area that is generally avoided by soft computing and DL researchers is the financial derivatives market. Even though there are many different products that exist on the market, the corresponding DL research is very scarce. However, for professionals working in the finance industry, these products actually provide incredible flexibilities ranging from hedging their investments to implementing leveraged transactions with mini- mized risk. Even though, opportunities exist for DL researchers, there was not a broad interest in the topic, since there are only a handful of studies for the derivatives market. Option strategy optimization, futures trading, option pricing, arbitrage trading can be among the areas that might benefit from DL research. Sentiment analysis, text mining, risk adjusted asset pricing are some of the other implementation areas that attract researchers

---

24   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  but not yet fully utilized. It is quite probable we will see more papers in these fields in the near future. Last, but not least, HFT is one area that has not benefited from the advancements in ML research to its full potential yet. Since HFT requires lightning-fast transaction processing, the statisti- cal learning model that is embedded into such trading systems must not introduce any extra latency to the existing system. This necessitates careful planning and modeling of such models. For that purpose, DL models embedded within the Graphic Process- ing Unit (GPU) or Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) based hardware solutions can be studied. The hardware aspects of DL implementations are generally omitted in almost all studies, but as stated above, there might be opportunities also in that field.  6.3.3. Suggestions for future research  Careful analysis of Fig. 8 indicates the rising overall appetite for applied DL research for finance. Even though the interest is broad, some areas like cryptocurrency and block chain studies might get more attention compared to other areas. With respect to the promising outlook in text mining and financial sentiment analysis, we believe behavioral finance is also a fairly untouched research area that hides a lot of opportunities within. There is a lack of research work published on behavioral finance using DL models. This might be mainly due to the diffi- culties of quantifying the inputs and outputs of behavioral finance research to be used with DL models. However, new advancements in text mining, NLP, semantics combined with agent-based com- putational finance can open up huge opportunities in that field. We would encourage researchers to look further into this for a possible implementation area as it currently seems to be wide open for new studies.  6.4. Responses to our initial research questions  At this point, since we gathered and processed all the infor- mation we need, we are ready to provide answers to our initially stated research questions. The questions and our corresponding answers according to our survey are as follows:  •   What financial application areas are of interest to DL com- munity? Response: Financial text mining, Algo-trading, risk assess- ments, sentiment analysis, portfolio management and fraud detection are among the most studied areas of finance re- search. (Please check Fig. 8)  •   How mature is the existing research in each of these appli- cation areas? Response:   Even   though   DL   models   already   had   better achievements compared to traditional counterparts in al- most all areas, the overall interest is still on the rise in all research areas.  •   What are the areas that have promising potentials from an academic/industrial research perspective? Response: Cryptocurrencies, blockchain, behavioral finance, HFT and derivatives market have promising potentials for research.  •   Which DL models are preferred (and more successful) in different applications? Response: RNN based models (in particular LSTM), CNN and DMLP have been used extensively in implementations. From what we have encountered, LSTM is more successful and preferred in time-series forecasting, whereas DMLP and CNN are better suited to applications requiring classification.  •   How do DL models pare against traditional soft comput- ing/ML techniques? Response: In most of the studies, DL models performed better than their ML counterparts. There were a few occa- sions where ML had comparable or even better solutions, however the general tendency is the outperformance of the DL methods.  •   What is the future direction for DL research in Finance? Response: Hybrid models based on Spatio-temporal data representations,   NLP,   semantics   and   text   mining-based models might become more important in the near future.  7. Conclusions  The financial industry and academia have started realizing the potentials of DL in various application areas. The number of research work keeps on increasing every year with an accelerated fashion. However, we are just in the early years of this new era, more studies will be implemented and new models will keep pouring in. In this survey, we wanted to highlight the state-of- the-art DL research for the financial applications. We not only provided a snapshot of the existing research status but also tried to identify the future roadway for intended researchers. Our findings indicate there are incredible opportunities within the field and it looks like they will not disappear anytime soon. So, we encourage the researchers that are interested in the area to start exploring.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgment  The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions. This work is supported by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) grant no 215E248.  References  [1]   Omer   Berat   Sezer,   Mehmet   Ugur   Gudelek,   Ahmet   Murat   Ozbayoglu, Financial   time   series   forecasting   with   deep   learning   :   A   systematic literature review: 2005-2019, Appl. Soft Comput. 90 (2020) 106181. [2]   Arash Bahrammirzaee, A comparative survey of artificial intelligence ap- plications in finance: artificial neural networks, expert system and hybrid intelligent systems, Neural Comput. Appl. 19 (8) (2010) 1165–1195. [3]   D. Zhang, L. Zhou, Discovering golden nuggets: Data mining in financial application, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part C (Appl. Rev.) 34 (4) (2004) 513–522. [4]   Asunción Mochón, David Quintana, Yago Sáez, Pedro Isasi Viñuela, Soft computing techniques applied to finance, Appl. Intell. 29 (2007) 111–115. [5]   Pulakkazhy, Mining in banking and its applications: A review, J. Comput. Sci. 9 (10) (2013) 1252–1259. [6]   Sendhil   Mullainathan,   Jann   Spiess,   Machine   learning:   An   applied econometric approach, J. Econ. Perspect. 31 (2) (2017) 87–106. [7]   Keke   Gai,   Meikang   Qiu,   Xiaotong   Sun,   A   survey   on   fintech,   J.   Netw. Comput. Appl. 103 (2018) 262–273. [8]   Boris Kovalerchuk, Evgenii Vityaev, Data Mining in Finance: Advances in Relational and Hybrid Methods, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA, 2000. [9]   Rafik A. Aliev, Bijan Fazlollahi, Rashad R. Aliev, Soft computing and its applications in business and economics, in: Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing, 2004. [10]   Anthony   Brabazon,   Michael   O’Neill   (Eds.),   Natural   Computing   in Computational Finance, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. [11]   Ludmila Dymowa, Soft Computing in Economics and Finance, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   25 [12]   Shu-Heng Chen (Ed.), Genetic algorithms and genetic programming in computational finance, Springer US, 2002. [13]   Ma.   Guadalupe   Castillo   Tapia,   Carlos   A.   Coello   Coello,   Applications   of multi-objective   evolutionary   algorithms   in   economics   and   finance:   A survey, in: 2007 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, IEEE, 2007, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cec.2007.4424516. [14]   Antonin Ponsich, Antonio Lopez Jaimes, Carlos A. Coello Coello, A survey on multiobjective evolutionary algorithms for the solution of the portfolio optimization problem and other finance and economics applications, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 17 (3) (2013) 321–344. [15]   Ruben   Aguilar-Rivera,   Manuel   Valenzuela-Rendon,   J.J.   Rodriguez-Ortiz, Genetic algorithms and darwinian approaches in financial applications: a survey, Expert Syst. Appl. 42 (21) (2015) 7684–7697. [16]   Bo K. Wong, Yakup Selvi, Neural network applications in finance: A re- view and analysis of literature (1990–1996), Information & Management 34 (3) (1998) 129–139. [17]   Yuhong   Li,   Weihua   Ma,   Applications   of   artificial   neural   networks   in financial   economics:   A   survey,   in:   2010   International   Symposium   on Computational Intelligence and Design, IEEE, 2010. [18]   B. Elmsili, B. Outtaj, Artificial neural networks applications in economics and management research: An exploratory literature review, in: 2018 4th International Conference on Optimization and Applications (ICOA), 2018, pp. 1–6. [19]   Blake   LeBaron,   Chapter   24   agent-based   computational   finance,   in:   L. Tesfatsion,   K.L.   Judd   (Eds.),   Handbook   of   Computational   Economics, in: Handbook of Computational Economics, vol. 2, Elsevier, 2006, pp. 1187–1233. [20]   Stephan   K.   Chalup,   Andreas   Mitschele,   Kernel   methods   in   finance, in:   Handbook   on   Information   Technology   in   Finance,   Springer   Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 655–687. [21]   Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, Deep learning, Nature 521 (7553) (2015) 436–444. [22]   George   Cybenko,   Approximation   by   superpositions   of   a   sigmoidal function, Math. Control Signals Syst. 2 (4) (1989) 303–314. [23]   Barry   L.   Kalman,   Stan   C.   Kwasny,   Why   tanh:   choosing   a   sigmoidal function, in: [Proceedings 1992] IJCNN International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Vol. 4, IEEE, 1992, pp. 578–581. [24]   Vinod Nair, Geoffrey E. Hinton, Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines, in: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-10), 2010, pp. 807–814. [25]   Andrew L. Maas, Awni Y. Hannun, Andrew Y. Ng, Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models, in: Proc. Icml, Vol. 30, 2013, pp. 3. [26]   Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, Quoc V. Le, Searching for activation functions, 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05941. [27]   Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Deep Learning, MIT Press, 2016, http://www.deeplearningbook.org. [28]   Sepp Hochreiter, Jürgen Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, Neural Comput. 9 (8) (1997) 1735–1780. [29]   Xueheng Qiu, Le Zhang, Ye Ren, P. Suganthan, Gehan Amaratunga, Ensem- ble deep learning for regression and time series forecasting, in: 2014 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Ensemble Learning (CIEL), 2014, pp. 1–6. [30]   Yoshua Bengio, Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and transfer learning, in: Proceedings of ICML Workshop on Unsupervised and Transfer Learning, 2012, pp. 17–36. [31]   Geoffrey   E.   Hinton,   Simon   Osindero,   Yee-Whye   Teh,   A   fast   learning algorithm for deep belief nets, Neural Comput. 18 (7) (2006) 1527–1554. [32]   Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, Extracting and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders, in:   Proceedings   of   the   25th   International   Conference   on   Machine Learning, ACM, 2008, pp. 1096–1103. [33]   Sercan Karaoglu, Ugur Arpaci, A deep learning approach for optimization of systematic signal detection in financial trading systems with big data, Int. J. Intell. Syst. Appl. Eng. SpecialIssue (SpecialIssue) (2017) 31–36. [34]   Wei Bao, Jun Yue, Yulei Rao, A deep learning framework for financial time series using stacked autoencoders and long-short term memory, PLoS One 12 (7) (2017) e0180944. [35]   Shuanglong   Liu,   Chao   Zhang,   Jinwen   Ma,   CNN-LSTM   Neural   network model   for   quantitative   strategy   analysis   in   stock   markets,   in:   Neu- ral Information Processing, Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 198–206. [36]   Liheng Zhang, Charu Aggarwal, Guo-Jun Qi, Stock price prediction via discovering multi-frequency trading patterns, in: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining - KDD17, ACM Press, 2017. [37]   Dat   Thanh   Tran,   Martin   Magris,   Juho   Kanniainen,   Moncef   Gabbouj, Alexandros   Iosifidis,   Tensor   representation   in   high-frequency   financial data for price change prediction, in: 2017 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), IEEE, 2017. [38]   Yue Deng, Feng Bao, Youyong Kong, Zhiquan Ren, Qionghai Dai, Deep direct   reinforcement   learning   for   financial   signal   representation   and trading, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 28 (3) (2017) 653–664. [39]   Thomas Fischer, Christopher Krauss, Deep learning with long short-term memory networks for financial market predictions, European J. Oper. Res. 270 (2) (2018) 654–669, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.11.054. [40]   Marios Mourelatos, Christos Alexakos, Thomas Amorgianiotis, Spiridon Likothanassis,   Financial   indices   modelling   and   trading   utilizing   deep learning techniques: The ATHENS SE FTSE/ASE large Cap use Case, in: 2018 Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications (INISTA), IEEE, 2018. [41]   Weiyu   Si,   Jinke   Li,   Peng   Ding,   Ruonan   Rao,   A   multi-objective   deep reinforcement learning approach for stock index future’s intraday trading, in: 2017 10th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID), IEEE, 2017. [42]   Bang Xiang Yong, Mohd Rozaini Abdul Rahim, Ahmad Shahidan Abdullah, A stock market trading system using deep neural network, in: Communi- cations in Computer and Information Science, Springer Singapore, 2017, pp. 356–364. [43]   David   W.   Lu,   Agent   inspired   trading   using   recurrent   reinforcement learning and lstm neural networks, 2017. [44]   Matthew Francis Dixon, Diego Klabjan, Jin Hoon Bang, Classification-based financial markets prediction using deep neural networks, SSRN Electron. J. (2016). [45]   Jerzy Korczak, Marcin Hernes, Deep learning for financial time series forecasting in a-trader system, in: Proceedings of the 2017 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems, IEEE, 2017. [46]   Bruno Spilak, Deep Neural Networks for Cryptocurrencies Price predic- tion (Master’s thesis), Humboldt-Universitat zu Berlin, Wirtschaftswis- senschaftliche Fakultat, 2018. [47]   Gyeeun Jeong, Ha Young Kim, Improving financial trading decisions using deep Q-learning: Predicting the number of shares, action strategies, and transfer learning, Expert Syst. Appl. 117 (2019) 125–138. [48]   Christopher Krauss, Xuan Anh Do, Nicolas Huck, Deep neural networks, gradient-boosted trees, random forests: statistical arbitrage on the S&P 500, European J. Oper. Res. 259 (2) (2017) 689–702. [49]   Google, System and Method for Computer Managed Funds to Outperform Benchmarks. [50]   Qinxue Meng, Daniel Catchpoole, David Skillicom, Paul J Kennedy, Re- lational autoencoder for feature extraction, in: 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 2017, pp. 364–371. [51]   Omer   Berat   Sezer,   Murat   Ozbayoglu,   Erdogan   Dogdu,   A   deep   neural- network based stock trading system based on evolutionary optimized technical analysis parameters, Procedia Comput. Sci. 114 (2017) 473–480. [52]   Ariel   Navon,   Yosi   Keller,   Financial   time   series   prediction   using   deep learning, 2017. [53]   Luigi Troiano, Elena Mejuto Villa, Vincenzo Loia, Replicating a trading strategy by means of LSTM for financial industry applications, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 14 (7) (2018) 3226–3234. [54]   Justin   Sirignano,   Rama   Cont,   Universal   features   of   price   formation   in financial   markets:   perspectives   from   deep   learning,   SSRN   Electron.   J. (2018). [55]   Avraam Tsantekidis, Nikolaos Passalis, Anastasios Tefas, Juho Kanniainen, Moncef Gabbouj, Alexandros Iosifidis, Using deep learning to detect price change indications in financial markets, in: 2017 25th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), IEEE, 2017. [56]   M. Ugur Gudelek, S. Arda Boluk, A. Murat Ozbayoglu, A deep learning based stock trading model with 2-d CNN trend detection, in: 2017 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), IEEE, 2017. [57]   Omer Berat Sezer, Ahmet Murat Ozbayoglu, Algorithmic financial trad- ing   with   deep   convolutional   neural   networks:   time   series   to   image conversion approach, Appl. Soft Comput. 70 (2018) 525–538. [58]   Guosheng Hu, Yuxin Hu, Kai Yang, Zehao Yu, Flood Sung, Zhihong Zhang, Fei   Xie,   Jianguo   Liu,   Neil   Robertson,   Timpathy   Hospedales,   Qiangwei Miemie,   Deep   stock   representation   learning:   From   Candlestick   charts to   investment   decisions,   in:   2018   IEEE   International   Conference   on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2018. [59]   Avraam Tsantekidis, Nikolaos Passalis, Anastasios Tefas, Juho Kanniainen, Moncef Gabbouj, Alexandros Iosifidis, Forecasting stock prices from the limit order book using convolutional neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE 19th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI), IEEE, 2017. [60]   Hakan Gunduz, Yusuf Yaslan, Zehra Cataltepe, Intraday prediction of borsa Istanbul using convolutional neural networks and feature correlations, Knowl.-Based Syst. 137 (2017) 138–148. [61]   Omer   Berat   Sezer,   Ahmet   Murat   Ozbayoglu,   Financial   trading   model with stock bar chart image time series with deep convolutional neural networks, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.04610. [62]   Will Serrano, Fintech model: The random neural network with genetic algorithm, Procedia Comput. Sci. 126 (2018) 537–546.

---

26   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  [63]   E.W. Saad, D.V. Prokhorov, D.C. Wunsch, Comparative study of stock trend prediction using time delay, recurrent and probabilistic neural networks, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 9 (6) (1998) 1456–1470. [64]   Jonathan Doering, Michael Fairbank, Sheri Markose, Convolutional neural networks applied to high-frequency market microstructure forecasting, in: 2017 9th Computer Science and Electronic Engineering (CEEC), IEEE, 2017. [65]   Zhengyao Jiang, Dixing Xu, Jinjun Liang, A deep reinforcement learning framework for the financial portfolio management problem, 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.10059. [66]   P. Tino, C. Schittenkopf, G. Dorffner, Financial volatility trading using recurrent   neural   networks,   IEEE   Trans.   Neural   Netw.   12   (4)   (2001) 865–874. [67]   Yu-Ying   Chen,   Wei-Lun   Chen,   Szu-Hao   Huang,   Developing   arbitrage strategy in high-frequency pairs trading with filterbank CNN algorithm, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Agents (ICA), IEEE, 2018. [68]   Omar   A.   Bari,   Arvin   Agah,   Ensembles of   text and time-series models for automatic generation of financial trading signals from social media content, J. Intell. Syst. (2018). [69]   Matthew Francis Dixon, Sequence classification of the limit order book using recurrent neural networks, SSRN Electron. J. (2017). [70]   Chiao-Ting Chen, An-Pin Chen, Szu-Hao Huang, Cloning strategies from trading records using agent-based reinforcement learning algorithm, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Agents (ICA), IEEE, 2018. [71]   Yue Wang, Chenwei Zhang, Shen Wang, Philip S. Yu, Lu Bai, Lixin Cui, Deep co-investment network learning for financial assets, 2018. [72]   Min-Yuh   Day,   Chia-Chou   Lee,   Deep   learning   for   financial   sentiment analysis on finance news providers, in: 2016 IEEE/ACM International Con- ference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), IEEE, 2016. [73]   Justin Sirignano, Deep learning for limit order books, 2016. [74]   Xiang Gao, Deep reinforcement learning for time series: playing idealized trading games, 2018. [75]   Yong Hu, Kang Liu, Xiangzhou Zhang, Lijun Su, E.W.T. Ngai, Mei Liu, Application   of   evolutionary   computation   for   rule   discovery   in   stock algorithmic trading: A literature review, Appl. Soft Comput. 36 (2015) 534–551. [76]   Martin Neil Baily, Robert E. Litan, Johnson Matthew S., The Origins of the Financial Crisis, in: Initiative on Business and Public Policy at Brookings, Fixing Finance Series - Paper 3, 2008. [77]   Cuicui Luo, Desheng Wu, Dexiang Wu, A deep learning approach for credit scoring using credit default swaps, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 65 (2017) 465–470. [78]   Lean Yu, Rongtian Zhou, Ling Tang, Rongda Chen, A DBN-based resam- pling   SVM   ensemble   learning   paradigm   for   credit   classification   with imbalanced data, Appl. Soft Comput. 69 (2018) 192–202. [79]   Ying   Li,   Xianghong   Lin,   Xiangwen   Wang,   Fanqi   Shen,   Zuzheng   Gong, Credit   risk   assessment   algorithm   using   deep   neural   networks   with clustering   and   merging,   in:   2017   13th   International   Conference   on Computational Intelligence and Security (CIS), IEEE, 2017. [80]   Khiem   Tran,   Thanh   Duong,   Quyen   Ho,   Credit   scoring   model:   A   com- bination   of   genetic   programming   and   deep   learning,   in:   2016   Future Technologies Conference (FTC), IEEE, 2016. [81]   Victor-Emil   Neagoe,   Adrian-Dumitru   Ciotec,   George-Sorin   Cucu,   Deep convolutional neural networks versus multilayer perceptron for finan- cial prediction, in: 2018 International Conference on Communications (COMM), IEEE, 2018. [82]   Bing Zhu, Wenchuan Yang, Huaxuan Wang, Yuan Yuan, A hybrid deep learning   model   for   consumer   credit   scoring,   in:   2018   International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Big Data (ICAIBD), IEEE, 2018. [83]   Ayahiko Niimi, Deep learning for credit card data analysis, in: 2015 World Congress on Internet Security (WorldCIS), IEEE, 2015. [84]   Zineb Lanbouri, Said Achchab, A hybrid deep belief network approach for financial distress prediction, in: 2015 10th International Conference on Intelligent Systems: Theories and Applications (SITA), IEEE, 2015. [85]   Vipula Rawte, Aparna Gupta, Mohammed J. Zaki, Analysis of year-over- year changes in risk factors disclosure in 10-k filings, in: Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Data Science for Macro-Modeling with Financial and Economic Datasets - DSMM18, ACM Press, 2018. [86]   Samuel Ronnqvist, Peter Sarlin, Detect & describe: Deep learning of bank stress in the news, in: 2015 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, IEEE, 2015. [87]   Samuel Ronnqvist, Peter Sarlin, Bank distress in the news: Describing events through deep learning, Neurocomputing 264 (2017) 57–70. [88]   Paola Cerchiello, Giancarlo Nicola, Samuel Rönnqvist, Peter Sarlin, Deep learning bank distress from news and numerical financial data, 2017, CoRR, abs/1706.09627. [89]   Nikhil Malik, Param Vir Singh, Urooj Khan, Can banks survive the next financial   crisis?   An   adversarial   deep   learning   model   for   bank   stress testing, in: An Adversarial Deep Learning Model for Bank Stress Testing (June 30, 2018), 2018. [90]   Bernardete Ribeiro, Noel Lopes, Deep belief networks for financial predic- tion, in: Neural Information Processing, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 766–773. [91]   Shu-Hao   Yeh,   Chuan-Ju   Wang,   Ming-Feng   Tsai,   Deep   belief   networks for   predicting   corporate   defaults,   in:   2015   24th   Wireless   and   Optical Communication Conference (WOCC), IEEE, 2015. [92]   Tadaaki Hosaka, Bankruptcy prediction using imaged financial ratios and convolutional neural networks, Expert Syst. Appl. (2018). [93]   Justin   Sirignano,   Apaar   Sadhwani,   Kay   Giesecke,   Deep   learning   for mortgage risk, SSRN Electron. J. (2018). [94]   Håvard Kvamme, Nikolai Sellereite, Kjersti Aas, Steffen Sjursen, Predicting mortgage default using convolutional neural networks, Expert Syst. Appl. 102 (2018) 207–217. [95]   Narek   Abroyan   and,   Neural   networks   for   financial   market   risk classification, Front. Signal Process. 1 (2) (2017). [96]   Sotirios   P.   Chatzis,   Vassilis   Siakoulis,   Anastasios   Petropoulos,   Evange- los Stavroulakis, Nikos Vlachogiannakis, Forecasting stock market crisis events using deep and statistical machine learning techniques, Expert Syst. Appl. 112 (2018) 353–371. [97]   Efstathios   Kirkos,   Yannis   Manolopoulos,   Data   mining   in   finance   and accounting: A review of current research trends, in: Proceedings of the 1   St   International   Conference   on   Enterprise   Systems   and   Accounting ICESAcc, 2004, pp. 63–78. [98]   V. Ravi, H. Kurniawan, Peter Nwee Kok Thai, P. Ravi Kumar, Soft com- puting system for bank performance prediction, Appl. Soft Comput. 8 (1) (2008) 305–315. [99]   Meryem   Duygun   Fethi,   Fotios   Pasiouras,   Assessing   bank   efficiency and   performance   with   operational   research   and   artificial   intelligence techniques: A survey, European J. Oper. Res. 204 (2) (2010) 189–198. [100]   Adel Lahsasna, Raja Noor Ainon, Ying Wah Teh, Credit scoring models using soft computing methods: A survey, Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol. 7 (2010) 115–123. [101]   Ning Chen, Bernardete Ribeiro, An Chen, Financial credit risk assessment: a recent review, Artif. Intell. Rev. 45 (1) (2015) 1–23. [102]   AI Marques, Vicente García, José Salvador Sánchez, A literature review on the application of evolutionary computing to credit scoring, J. Oper. Res. Soc. 64 (9) (2013) 1384–1399. [103]   P. Ravi Kumar, V. Ravi, Bankruptcy prediction in banks and firms via statistical and intelligent techniques – A review, European J. Oper. Res. 180 (1) (2007) 1–28. [104]   Antanas Verikas, Zivile Kalsyte, Marija Bacauskiene, Adas Gelzinis, Hybrid and ensemble-based soft computing techniques in bankruptcy prediction: a survey, Soft Comput. 14 (9) (2009) 995–1010. [105]   Jie Sun, Hui Li, Qing-Hua Huang, Kai-Yu He, Predicting financial distress and   corporate   failure:   A   review   from   the   state-of-the-art   definitions, modeling,   sampling,   and   featuring   approaches,   Knowl.-Based   Syst.   57 (2014) 41–56. [106]   W. Lin, Y. Hu, C. Tsai, Machine learning in financial crisis prediction: A survey, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part C (Appl. Rev.) 42 (4) (2012) 421–436. [107]   E. Kirkos, C. Spathis, Y. Manolopoulos, Data mining techniques for the detection of fraudulent financial statements, Expert Syst. Appl. 32 (4) (2007) 995–1003. [108]   Dianmin Yue, Xiaodan Wu, Yunfeng Wang, Yue Li, Chao-Hsien Chu, A review of data mining-based financial fraud detection research, in: 2007 International Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, IEEE, 2007. [109]   Shiguo Wang, A comprehensive survey of data mining-based accounting- fraud detection research, in: 2010 International Conference on Intelligent Computation Technology and Automation, IEEE, 2010. [110]   Clifton   Phua,   Vincent   C.S.   Lee,   Kate   Smith-Miles,   Ross   W.   Gayler,   A comprehensive survey of data mining-based fraud detection research, 2010, CoRR, abs/1009.6119. [111]   E.W.T. Ngai, Yong Hu, Y.H. Wong, Yijun Chen, Xin Sun, The application of data mining techniques in financial fraud detection: a classification framework and an academic review of literature, Decis. Support Syst. 50 (3) (2011) 559–569. [112]   Anuj Sharma, Prabin Kumar Panigrahi, A review of financial accounting fraud detection based on data mining techniques, Int. J. Comput. Appl. 39 (1) (2012) 37–47. [113]   Jarrod West, Maumita Bhattacharya, Intelligent financial fraud detection: A comprehensive review, Comput. Secur. 57 (2016) 47–66. [114]   Yaya Heryadi, Harco Leslie Hendric Spits Warnars, Learning temporal rep- resentation of transaction amount for fraudulent transaction recognition using cnn, stacked lstm, and CNN-LSTM, in: 2017 IEEE International Con- ference on Cybernetics and Computational Intelligence (CyberneticsCom), IEEE, 2017. [115]   Abhimanyu   Roy,   Jingyi   Sun,   Robert   Mahoney,   Loreto   Alonzi,   Stephen Adams, Peter Beling, Deep learning detecting fraud in credit card transac- tions, in: 2018 Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium (SIEDS), IEEE, 2018.

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   27 [116]   Jon Ander Gómez, Juan Arévalo, Roberto Paredes, Jordi Nin, End-to-end neural network architecture for fraud scoring in card payments, Pattern Recognit. Lett. 105 (2018) 175–181. [117]   Ishan Sohony, Rameshwar Pratap, Ullas Nambiar, Ensemble learning for credit   card   fraud   detection,   in:   Proceedings   of   the   ACM   India   Joint International Conference on Data Science and Management of Data - CoDS-COMAD18, ACM Press, 2018. [118]   Johannes   Jurgovsky,   Michael   Granitzer,   Konstantin   Ziegler,   Sylvie   Cal- abretto,   Pierre-Edouard   Portier,   Liyun   He-Guelton,   Olivier   Caelen,   Se- quence classification for credit-card fraud detection, Expert Syst. Appl. 100 (2018) 234–245. [119]   Ebberth L. Paula, Marcelo Ladeira, Rommel N. Carvalho, Thiago Marzagao, Deep learning anomaly detection as support fraud investigation in Brazil- ian exports and anti-money laundering, in: 2016 15th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), IEEE, 2016. [120]   Thiago Alencar Gomes, Rommel Novaes Carvalho, Ricardo Silva Carvalho, Identifying anomalies in parliamentary expenditures of Brazilian chamber of deputies with deep autoencoders, in: 2017 16th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), IEEE, 2017. [121]   Yibo   Wang,   Wei   Xu,   Leveraging   deep   learning   with   LDA-based   text analytics to detect automobile insurance fraud, Decis. Support Syst. 105 (2018) 87–95. [122]   Longfei Li, Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li, Tao Chen, POSTER: Practical fraud trans- action prediction, in: ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2017. [123]   Allan Inocencio de Souza Costa, Luis Silva, Sequence classification of the limit order book using recurrent neural networks, 2016. [124]   Nikolaos D. Goumagias, Dimitrios Hristu-Varsakelis, Yannis M. Assael, Us- ing deep q-learning to understand the tax evasion behavior of risk-averse firms, Expert Syst. Appl. 101 (2018) 258–270. [125]   Bin Li, Steven C.H. Hoi, Online portfolio selection: A survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 46 (3) (2014) 35:1–35:36. [126]   K. Metaxiotis, K. Liagkouras, Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms for portfolio management: A comprehensive literature review, Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (14) (2012) 11685–11698. [127]   Lawrence   Takeuchi,   Applying   deep   learning   to   enhance   momentum trading strategies in stocks, 2013. [128]   Anthony Grace, Can deep learning techniques improve the risk adjusted returns from enhanced indexing investment strategies, 2017. [129]   XingYu Fu, JinHong Du, YiFeng Guo, MingWen Liu, Tao Dong, XiuWen Duan, A machine learning framework for stock selection, 2018. [130]   Saurabh Aggarwal, Somya Aggarwal, Deep investment in financial mar- kets using deep learning models, Int. J. Comput. Appl. 162 (2) (2017) 40–43. [131]   J.B. Heaton, Nick Polson, Deep learning for finance: Deep portfolios, SSRN Electron. J. (2016). [132]   Chi-Ming Lin, Jih-Jeng Huang, Mitsuo Gen, Gwo-Hshiung Tzeng, Recurrent neural network for dynamic portfolio selection, Appl. Math. Comput. 175 (2) (2006) 1139–1146. [133]   Nijol   Maknickien,   Selection   of   orthogonal   investment   portfolio   using evolino   RNN   trading   model,   Procedia   -   Soc.   Behav.   Sci.   110   (2014) 1158–1165. [134]   Bo Zhou, Deep learning and the cross-section of stock returns: Neural networks combining price and fundamental information, SSRN Electron. J. (2018). [135]   Bilberto Batres-Estrada, Deep Learning for Multivariate Financial Time Series (Master’s thesis), KTH, Mathematical Statistics, 2015. [136]   Sang Il Lee, Seong Joon Yoo, Threshold-based portfolio: the role of the threshold and its applications, J. Supercomput. (2018). [137]   Hitoshi   Iwasaki,   Ying   Chen,   Topic   sentiment   asset   pricing   with   DNN supervised learning, SSRN Electron. J. (2018). [138]   Zhipeng   Liang,   Hao   Chen,   Junhao   Zhu,   Kangkang   Jiang,   Yanran   Li, Adversarial deep reinforcement learning in portfolio management, 2018. [139]   Jiaqi Chen, Wenbo Wu, Michael Tindall, Hedge Fund Return Prediction and   Fund   Selection:   A   Machine-Learning   Approach,   Occasional   Papers 16–4, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 2016. [140]   Zhengyao Jiang, Jinjun Liang, Cryptocurrency portfolio management with deep   reinforcement   learning,   in:   2017   Intelligent   Systems   Conference (IntelliSys), IEEE, 2017. [141]   Nijole   Maknickiene,   Aleksandras   Vytautas   Rutkauskas,   Algirdas Maknickas,   Investigation   of   financial   market   prediction   by   recurrent neural network, 2014. [142]   Robert Culkin, Sanjiv R. Das, Machine learning in finance: The Case of deep learning in option pricing, 2017. [143]   Pei-Ying Hsu, Chin Chou, Szu-Hao Huang, An-Pin Chen, A market making quotation strategy based on dual deep learning agents for option pricing and bid-ask spread estimation, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Agents (ICA), IEEE, 2018. [144]   Guanhao Feng, Nicholas G. Polson, Jianeng Xu, Deep factor alpha, 2018. [145]   Rui-Yang Chen, A traceability chain algorithm for artificial neural net- works   using   t–s   fuzzy   cognitive   maps   in   blockchain,   Future   Gener. Comput. Syst. 80 (2018) 198–210. [146]   Lihao Nan, Dacheng Tao, Bitcoin mixing detection using deep autoen- coder, in: 2018 IEEE Third International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace (DSC), IEEE, 2018. [147]   Gonçalo Duarte Lima Freire Lopes, Deep learning for market forecasts, 2018. [148]   Sean McNally, Jason Roche, Simon Caton, Predicting the price of bitcoin using machine learning, in: 2018 26th Euromicro International Confer- ence on Parallel, Distributed and Network-Based Processing (PDP), IEEE, 2018. [149]   Colm Kearney, Sha Liu, Textual sentiment in finance: A survey of methods and models, Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 33 (2014) 171–185. [150]   Qili Wang, Wei Xu, Han Zheng, Combining the wisdom of crowds and technical   analysis   for   financial   market   prediction   using   deep   random subspace ensembles, Neurocomputing 299 (2018) 51–61. [151]   Lei Shi, Zhiyang Teng, Le Wang, Yue Zhang, Alexander Binder, Deepclue: Visual   interpretation   of   text-based   deep   stock   prediction,   IEEE   Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. (2018) 1. [152]   Yangtuo Peng, Hui Jiang, Leverage financial news to predict stock price movements   using   word   embeddings   and   deep   neural   networks,   in: Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016. [153]   Qun   Zhuge,   Lingyu   Xu,   Gaowei   Zhang,   LSTM   neural   network   with emotional analysis for prediction of stock price, 2017. [154]   Wang   Zhongsheng,   Measuring   financial   crisis   index   for   risk   warning through analysis of social network, 2018. [155]   Sushree   Das,   Ranjan   Kumar   Behera,   Mukesh   Kumar,   Santanu   Kumar Rath, Real-time sentiment analysis of twitter streaming data for stock prediction, Procedia Comput. Sci. 132 (2018) 956–964. [156]   Jordan   Prosky,   Xingyou   Song,   Andrew   Tan,   Michael   Zhao,   Sentiment predictability for stocks, 2017, CoRR, abs/1712.05785. [157]   Jiahong Li, Hui Bu, Junjie Wu, Sentiment-aware stock market prediction: A deep learning method, in: 2017 International Conference on Service Systems and Service Management, IEEE, 2017. [158]   Yifu Huang, Kai Huang, Yang Wang, Hao Zhang, Jihong Guan, Shuigeng Zhou, Exploiting twitter moods to boost financial trend prediction based on   deep   network   models,   in:   Intelligent   Computing   Methodologies, Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 449–460. [159]   Leela Mitra, Gautam Mitra, Applications of news analytics in finance: A review, in: The Handbook of News Analytics in Finance, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2012, pp. 1–39. [160]   Feng   Li,   Textual   analysis   of   corporate   disclosures:   A   survey   of   the literature, J. Account. Lit. 29 (2011). [161]   Tim Loughran, Bill McDonald, Textual analysis in accounting and finance: A survey, J. Account. Res. 54 (4) (2016) 1187–1230. [162]   B. Shravan Kumar, Vadlamani Ravi, A survey of the applications of text mining in financial domain, Knowl.-Based Syst. 114 (2016) 128–147. [163]   Marc-André Mittermayer, Gerhard F. Knolmayer, Text mining systems for market response to news: A survey, 2006. [164]   Arman Khadjeh Nassirtoussi, Saeed Aghabozorgi, Teh Ying Wah, David Chek Ling Ngo, Text mining for market prediction: A systematic review, Expert Syst. Appl. 41 (16) (2014) 7653–7670. [165]   Huy D. Huynh, L. Minh Dang, Duc Duong, A new model for stock price movements prediction using deep neural network, in: Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Information and Communication Technology - SoICT 2017, ACM Press, 2017. [166]   Songqiao Han, Xiaoling Hao, Hailiang Huang, An event-extraction ap- proach for business analysis from online chinese news, Electron. Commer. Res. Appl. 28 (2018) 244–260. [167]   Mathias Kraus, Stefan Feuerriegel, Decision support from financial disclo- sures with deep neural networks and transfer learning, Decis. Support Syst. 104 (2017) 38–48. [168]   L. Minh Dang, Abolghasem Sadeghi-Niaraki, Huy D. Huynh, Kyungbok Min,   Hyeonjoon   Moon,   Deep   learning   approach   for   short-term   stock trends prediction based on two-stream gated recurrent unit network, IEEE Access (2018) 1. [169]   Xiao   Ding,   Yue   Zhang,   Ting   Liu,   Junwen   Duan,   Deep   learning   for event-driven stock prediction, in: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, in: IJCAI’15, AAAI Press, 2015, pp. 2327–2333. [170]   Manuel R. Vargas, Beatriz S.L.P. de Lima, Alexandre G. Evsukoff, Deep learning for stock market prediction from financial news articles, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Virtual Environments   for   Measurement   Systems   and   Applications   (CIVEMSA), IEEE, 2017.

---

28   A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384  [171]   Ryo   Akita,   Akira   Yoshihara,   Takashi   Matsubara,   Kuniaki   Uehara,   Deep learning for stock prediction using numerical and textual information, in:   2016   IEEE/ACIS   15th   International   Conference   on   Computer   and Information Science (ICIS), IEEE, 2016. [172]   Ishan   Verma,   Lipika   Dey,   Hardik   Meisheri,   Detecting,   quantifying   and accessing impact of news events on Indian stock indices, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Intelligence - WI17, ACM Press, 2017. [173]   Xi   Zhang,   Yunjia   Zhang,   Senzhang   Wang,   Yuntao   Yao,   Binxing   Fang, Philip   S.   Yu,   Improving   stock   market   prediction   via   heterogeneous information fusion, Knowl.-Based Syst. 143 (2018) 236–247. [174]   Weiling Chen, Chai Kiat Yeo, Chiew Tong Lau, Bu Sung Lee, Leveraging social media news to predict stock index movement using RNN-boost, Data Knowl. Eng. (2018). [175]   Ziniu Hu, Weiqing Liu, Jiang Bian, Xuanzhe Liu, Tie-Yan Liu, Listening to chaotic whispers: A deep learning framework for news-oriented stock trend   prediction,   in:   Proceedings   of   the   Eleventh   ACM   International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, in: WSDM ’18, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp. 261–269. [176]   Xiaodong Li, Jingjing Cao, Zhaoqing Pan, Market impact analysis via deep learned architectures, Neural Comput. Appl. (2018). [177]   Che-Yu Lee, Von-Wun Soo, Predict stock price with financial news based on   recurrent   convolutional   neural   networks,   in:   2017   Conference   on Technologies and Applications of Artificial Intelligence (TAAI), IEEE, 2017. [178]   Shotaro Minami, Predicting equity price with corporate action events using LSTM-RNN, J. Math. Financ. 08 (01) (2018) 58–63. [179]   Akira Yoshihara, Kazuki Fujikawa, Kazuhiro Seki, Kuniaki Uehara, Predict- ing stock market trends by recurrent deep neural networks, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 759–769. [180]   Przemyslaw Buczkowski, Predicting stock trends based on expert rec- ommendations   using   GRU/lstm   neural   networks,   in:   Lecture   Notes   in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 708–717. [181]   Leonardo dos Santos Pinheiro, Mark Dras, Stock market prediction with deep   learning:   a   character-based   neural   language   model   for   event- based trading, in: Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technology Association Workshop 2017, 2017, pp. 6–15. [182]   Yang   Liu,   Qingguo   Zeng,   Huanrui   Yang,   Adrian   Carrio,   Stock   price movement prediction from financial news with deep learning and knowl- edge graph embedding, in: Knowledge Management and Acquisition for Intelligent Systems, Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 102–113. [183]   Takashi Matsubara, Ryo Akita, Kuniaki Uehara, Stock price prediction by deep neural generative model of news articles, IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. E101.D (4) (2018) 901–908. [184]   Janderson B. Nascimento, Marco Cristo, The impact of structured event embeddings on scalable stock forecasting models, in: Proceedings of the 21st Brazilian Symposium on Multimedia and the Web - WebMedia15, ACM Press, 2015. [185]   Md Shad Akhtar, Abhishek Kumar, Deepanway Ghosal, Asif Ekbal, Push- pak Bhattacharyya, A multilayer perceptron based ensemble technique for   fine-grained   financial   sentiment   analysis,   in:   Proceedings   of   the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017, pp. 540–546. [186]   Ching-Yun   Chang,   Yue   Zhang,   Zhiyang   Teng,   Zahn   Bozanic,   Bin   Ke, Measuring the information content of financial news, in: COLING, 2016. [187]   Hitkul   Jangid,   Shivangi   Singhal,   Rajiv   Ratn   Shah,   Roger   Zimmermann, Aspect-based financial sentiment analysis using deep learning, in: Com- panion of the the Web Conference 2018 on the Web Conference 2018 - WWW18, ACM Press, 2018. [188]   Shijia   E.,   Li   Yang,   Mohan   Zhang,   Yang   Xiang,   Aspect-based   financial sentiment analysis with deep neural networks, in: Companion of the the Web Conference 2018 on the Web Conference 2018 - WWW18, ACM Press, 2018. [189]   Sahar Sohangir, Dingding Wang, Anna Pomeranets, Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar, Big data: Deep learning for financial sentiment analysis, J. Big Data 5 (1) (2018). [190]   Nader Mahmoudi, Paul Docherty, Pablo Moscato, Deep neural networks understand investors better, Decis. Support Syst. 112 (2018) 23–34. [191]   Shiori   Kitamori,   Hiroyuki   Sakai,   Hiroki   Sakaji,   Extraction   of   sentences concerning business performance forecast and economic forecast from summaries   of   financial   statements   by   deep   learning,   in:   2017   IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), IEEE, 2017. [192]   Guangyuan Piao, John G. Breslin, Financial aspect and sentiment pre- dictions   with   deep   neural   networks,   in:   Companion   of   the   the   Web Conference 2018 on the Web Conference 2018 - WWW18, ACM Press, 2018. [193]   Weifeng Li, Hsinchun Chen, Identifying top sellers in underground econ- omy using deep learning-based sentiment analysis, in: 2014 IEEE Joint Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference, IEEE, 2014. [194]   Andrew   Moore,   Paul   Rayson,   Lancaster   a   at   semeval-2017   task   5: Evaluation   metrics   matter:   predicting   sentiment   from   financial   news headlines, in: Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Seman- tic Evaluation (SemEval-2017), Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 2017, pp. 581–585. [195]   Josh Jia-Ching Ying, Po-Yu Huang, Chih-Kai Chang, Don-Lin Yang, A pre- liminary study on deep learning for predicting social insurance payment behavior, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2017. [196]   Sahar   Sohangir,   Dingding   Wang,   Finding   expert   authors   in   financial forum using deep learning methods, in: 2018 Second IEEE International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC), IEEE, 2018. [197]   Vadim Sokolov, Discussion of ’deep learning for finance: deep portfolios’, Appl. Stoch. Models Bus. Ind. 33 (1) (2017) 16–18. [198]   Abdelali El Bouchti, Ahmed Chakroun, Hassan Abbar, Chafik Okar, Fraud detection in banking using deep reinforcement learning, in: 2017 Seventh International Conference on Innovative Computing Technology (INTECH), IEEE, 2017. [199]   Matthew Dixon, Diego Klabjan, Jin Hoon Bang, Implementing deep neural networks   for   financial   market   prediction   on   the   intel   xeon   phi,   in: Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on High Performance Computational Finance - WHPCF15, ACM Press, 2015. [200]   John   Alberg,   Zachary   Chase   Lipton,   Improving   factor-based   quanti- tative   investing   by   forecasting   company   fundamentals,   2017,   CoRR, abs/1711.04837. [201]   Kee-Hoon Kim, Chang-Seok Lee, Sang-Muk Jo, Sung-Bae Cho, Predicting the   success   of   bank   telemarketing   using   deep   convolutional   neural network, in: 2015 7th International Conference of Soft Computing and Pattern Recognition (SoCPaR), IEEE, 2015. [202]   Joonhyuck   Lee,   Dong   Sik   Jang,   Sangsung   Park,   Deep   learning-based corporate performance prediction model considering technical capability, Sustainability 9 (6) (2017).  Glossary  AE:   Autoencoder.  AI:   Artificial Intelligence.  AMEX:   American Stock Exchange.  ANN:   Artificial Neural Network.  ARIMA:   Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average.  AUC:   Area Under the Curve.  AUROC:   Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics.  BA:   Balanced Accuracy.  BELM:   Basic Extreme Learning Machine.  BHC:   Bank Holding Companies.  Bi-GRU:   Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit.  Bi-LSTM:   Bidirectional LSTM.  BIST:   Istanbul Stock Exchange Index.  BIST:   Bollinger Band.  BPTT:   Backpropagation Through Time.  CAE:   Convolutional Autoencoder.  CAGR:   Compound Annual Growth Rate.  CART:   Classification and Regression Trees.  CCI:   Commodity Channel Index.  CDAX:   German Stock Market Index Calculated by Deutsche Börse.  CDS:   Credit Default Swaps.  CGAN:   Conditional  CME:   Chicago Mercantile Exchange.  CNN:   Convolutional Neural Network.  CRIX:   The Cryptocurrency Index.  CRSP:   Center for Research in Security Prices.  CSI:   China Securities Index.  DAX:   The Deutscher Aktienindex.  DBN:   Deep Belief Network.  DCNL:   Deep Co-investment Network Learning.  DCNN:   Deep Convolutional Neural Network.  DDPG:   Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient.  Deep-FASP:   The Financial Aspect and Sentiment Prediction task with Deep neural networks.  DFFN:   Deep Feed Forward Network.  DFNN:   Deep Feedforward Neural Network.  DGM:   Deep Neural Generative Model.  DGP:   Deep Gaussian Process.  DJI:   Dow Jones Index.  DJIA:   Dow Jones Industrial Average.  DL:   Deep Learning.  DLR:   Deep Learning Representation.

---

A.M. Ozbayoglu, M.U. Gudelek and O.B. Sezer / Applied Soft Computing Journal 93 (2020) 106384   29  DMI:   Directional Movement Index.  DMLP:   Deep Multilayer Perceptron.  DNN:   Deep Neural Network.  DP:   Discriminant Power.  DQL:   Deep Q-Learning.  DRL:   Deep Reinforcement Learning.  DRSE:   Deep Random Subspace Ensembles.  DTW:   Dynamic Time Warping.  EA:   Evolutionary Algorithm.  EC:   Evolutionary Computation.  ELM:   Extreme Learning Machine.  EMA:   Exponential Moving Average.  ETF:   Exchange-Traded Fund.  FDDR:   Fuzzy Deep Direct Reinforcement Learning.  FE-QAR:   Fixed Effects Quantile VAR.  FFNN:   Feedforward Neural Network.  FN:   False Negative.  FNN:   Fully Connected Neural Network.  FP:   False Positive.  FPGA:   Field Programmable Gate Array.  FTSE:   London Financial Times Stock Exchange Index.  G-mean:   Geometric Mean.  GA:   Genetic Algorithm.  GAN:   Generative Adversarial Network.  GASVR:   GA with a SVR.  GBDT:   Gradient-Boosted-DecisionTrees.  GBT:   Gradient Boosted Trees.  GP:   Genetic Programming.  GPU:   Graphic Processing Unit.  GRU:   Gated-Recurrent Unit.  HAN:   Hybrid Attention Network.  HFT:   High Frequency Trading.  HMM:   Hidden Markov Model.  HS:   China Shanghai Shenzhen Stock Index.  HSI:   Hong Kong Hang Seng Index.  IBB:   iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology ETF.  KELM:   Kernel Extreme Learning Machine.  KNN:   K-Nearest Neighbors.  KOSPI:   The Korea Composite Stock Price Index.  KS:   Kolmogorov–Smirnov.  LAR:   Linear Auto-regression Predictor.  LDA:   Latent Dirichlet Allocation.  LFM:   Lookahead Factor Models.  LinR:   Linear Regression.  LOB:   Limit Order Book Data.  LR:   Logistic Regression.  LSTM:   Long-Short Term Memory.  MA:   Moving Average.  MACD:   Moving Average Convergence and Divergence.  MAE:   Mean Absolute Error.  MAPE:   Mean Absolute Percentage Error.  MCC:   Matthew Correlation Coefficient.  MDA:   Multilinear Discriminant Analysis.  MDD:   Maximum Drawdown.  ML:   Machine Learning.  MLP:   Multilayer Perceptron.  MODRL:   Multi-objective Deep Reinforcement Learning.  MOEA:   Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithm.  MSE:   Mean Squared Error.  MV-t:   Multivariate t Distribution.  MVN:   Multivariate Normal Distribution.  NASDAQ:   National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations.  NES:   Natural Evolution Strategies.  NIFTY:   National Stock Exchange of India.  NIKKEI:   Tokyo Nikkei Index.  NLP:   Natural Language Processing.  NN:   Neural Network.  NYSE:   New York Stock Exchange.  OCHL:   Open,Close,High, Low.  OCHLV:   Open,Close,High, Low, Volume.  PCA:   Principal Component Analysis.  PCC:   Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient.  PLR:   Piecewise Linear Representation.  PNN:   Probabilistic Neural Network.  PPO:   Proximal Policy Optimization.  PSO:   Particle Swarm Optimization.  R 2   :   Squared correlation, Non-linear regression multiple correlation.  RBM:   Restricted Boltzmann Machine.  RCNN:   Recurrent CNN.  ReLU:   Rectified Linear Unit.  RF:   Random Forest.  RL:   Reinforcement Learning.  RMSE:   Root Mean Square Error.  RNN:   Recurrent Neural Network.  ROA:   Return on Assets.  ROC:   Price of Change.  RSE:   Relative Squared Error.  RSI:   Relative Strength Index.  S&P500:   Standard’s & Poors 500 Index.  SAE:   Stacked Autoencoder.  SCI:   SSE Composite Index.  SFM:   State Frequency Memory.  SGD:   Stochastic Gradient Descent.  SPY:   SPDR S&P 500 ETF.  SR:   Sharpe-ratio.  STD:   Standard Deviation.  SVD:   Singular Value Decomposition.  SVM:   Support Vector Machine.  SVR:   Support Vector Regressor.  SZSE:   Shenzhen Stock Exchange Composite Index.  TAIEX:   Taiwan Capitalization Weighted Stock Index.  TALIB:   Technical Analysis Library Package.  TAQ:   Trade and Quote.  TDNN:   Timedelay Neural Network.  TEMA:   Triple Exponential Moving Average.  TF-IDF:   Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency.  TGRU:   Two-stream GRU.  THEIL-U:   Theil’s inequality coefficient.  TN:   True Negative.  TP:   True Positive.  TR:   Total Return.  TSE:   Tokyo Stock Exchange.  TWSE:   Taiwan Stock Exchange.  VAR:   Vector Auto Regression.  VWL:   WL Kernel-based Method.  WBA:   Weighted Balanced Accuracy.  WMTR:   Weighted Multichannel Time-series Regression.  WSURT:   Wilcoxon Sum-rank Test.  WT:   Wavelet Transforms.  XGBoost:   eXtreme Gradient Boosting.