REPORT FOR Q1 2025

---

KEY FIGURES  NOK million   APM 1)   31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Net rental income   918   865   3 317  Fair value adjustments in inv. properties and interest rate derivatives   1   439   257   774  Profit before income tax   1 004   814   2 863  Profit before income tax, fair value adjustments and currency result   2   598   562   2 129  Equity ratio   3   52 %   51 %   51 %  Equity per share (NOK)   4   320   303   312  Long-term net asset value per share (NOK)   4   376   355   367  Net cash flow from operations   542   527   1 953  Liquidity reserves   5   10 067   7 458   6 561  Amortisation next 12 months   6   6 380   2 875   3 405  Interest-bearing debt   7   21 028   20 526   21 342  Interest per balance sheet date   8   4,67 %   5,19 %   4,92 %  Loan to value ratio   7   35 %   36 %   36 %  Interest coverage ratio   9   3,0   3,0   3,0  Net investments   10   324   183   1 763  Market value properties   11   59 381   56 786   58 612  Annualized rental income level   12   4 175   3 920   4 125  Yield properties   13   6,1 %   6,0 %   6,2 %  Sales, owned shopping centers   13 402   13 198   62 558  Share price per balance sheet date (NOK)   259,0   222,0   227,0  1)   Definitions, calculations and explanations on the use of alternative performance measures (APM) are included at page 20 in the report. NOK million  Profit before income tax, fair value adjustments and  currency result (quarterly)  Q1  2021  Q3  2021  Q1  2022  Q3  2022  Q1  2023  Q3  2023  Q1  2024  Q3  2024  Q1  2025  300  400  500  600  700 NOK  Long-term net asset value per share  (quarterly)  Q1  2021  Q3  2021  Q1  2022  Q3  2022  Q1  2023  Q3  2023  Q1  2024  Q3  2024  Q1  2025  200  250  300  350  400  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 2

---

Q1 HIGHLIGHTS  •   The Group had a satisfactory development in the first quarter, with profit before income tax amounting to NOK 1 004 (814) million. •   The Group’s rental income in the first quarter amounted to NOK 1 009 (958) million. •   Fair value adjustments of investment properties amounted to NOK 442 (63) million, and fair value adjustments of interest rate derivatives totalled NOK 18 (233) million in the quarter. •   Profit before tax, fair value adjustments and currency result amounted to NOK 598 (562) million in the quarter. •   The Group’s financial position is solid. By the end of the quarter the Group’s equity ratio increased to 52 % (51 %), while its liquidity reserves was NOK 10 067 (7 458) million. •   Retail sales in the shopping center portfolio in the first quarter were NOK 13 402 (13 198) million, an increase of 2 % compared to the same quarter last year.  The figures in brackets are for the corresponding period/date last year  The image on the cover: Storo Storsenter  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 3

---

FINANCIAL POSITION/BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31.03.2025  The Group’s total assets were NOK 63 655 (60 966) million, with investment properties accounting for 59 415 (56 796) 1   million of that figure. Total equity was NOK 32 868 (31 093) million, and the equity ratio 2   was 52 % (51 %). Equity per share was NOK 320 (303), while the long-term net asset value per share 2   was calculated at NOK 376 (355). NOK  Equity per share  (quarterly)  Q1  2021  Q3  2021  Q1  2022  Q3  2022  Q1  2023  Q3  2023  Q1  2024  Q3  2024  Q1  2025  200  250  300  350  Equity per share has since 31.03.2021 increased by 16 %.  Interest-bearing debt was NOK 21 028 (20 526) million, with a loan-to-value ratio 2   of 35 % (36 %). The Group’s share of the equity in joint ventures and associated companies was NOK 1 770 (1 880) million.  SUMMARY OF THE RESULT FOR Q1  Profit before income tax was NOK 1 004 (814) million. Fair value adjustments of investment properties and interest rate derivatives totalled NOK 439 (257) million 3 . Profit before income tax, fair value adjustment and currency result 2   amounted to NOK 598 (562) million.  RENTAL INCOME AND PROPERTY-RELATED INCOME/EXPENSES  Gross rental income was NOK 1 009 (958) million. Property-related income amounted to NOK 270 (306) million and consists mainly of payments from the Group’s tenants to cover letting and property administration costs as well as costs related to the operation of shopping center associations. Property-related expenses amounted to NOK 361 (399) million, including the above-mentioned letting and property administration costs of NOK 229 (246) million. Maintenance expenses for the property portfolio amounted to NOK 52 (57) million. Other property-related costs amounted to NOK 80 million (95). The decrease from last year is primarily explained by changes in provisions for losses and realized losses on accounts receivable. Net rental income was therefore NOK 918 (865) million.  FAIR VALUE ADJUSTMENTS OF INVESTMENT PROPERTIES  The value of the Group’s investment properties increased by NOK 442 (63) million in Q1. The increase in value in the first quarter is primarily explained by rental growth on the property portfolio. The average yield used in valuation of the property portfolio decreased from 6,2 % to 6,1 %. The Group’s property portfolio consists of the following property segments: •   Shopping center properties in Norway and Sweden. •   Other commercial properties including rental housing, primarily in the Oslo area. In the first quarter the values developed differently for the shopping center and commercial segments. The value of the Group’s shopping center properties increased by NOK 466 (128) million, while the value of its commercial properties was adjusted downward by -24 (-65) million.  SHARE OF PROFIT IN JOINT VENTURES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES  The Group’s share of the results of joint ventures and associated companies amounted to NOK 2 (-8) million. The fair value adjustments of investment properties and interest rate derivatives in these companies amounting to NOK -22 (-39) million.  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 4  1   See note 8  2   For definitions see alternative performance measures (APM) at the end of the report  3   Includes investments in joint ventures and associated companies

---

Underlying figures for the Group’s share of the results and balance sheet totals for these companies are shown in note 9.  OTHER OPERATING INCOME AND EXPENSES  Other operating income was NOK 16 (16) million and consisted mainly of sales income from other activities. Other operating and administrative expenses amounted to NOK 74 (64) million, while depreciation and amortisation amounted to 3 (3) million.  FINANCIAL INCOME AND EXPENSES  Net financial items amounted to NOK -297 (-55) million, with fair value adjustments of financial instruments accounting for NOK 18 (233) million of that figure. Net interest expenses amounted to NOK 259 (270) million. The decrease in interest expenses is attributed to a lower average interest rate on the debt, but the decline is mitigated by a somewhat higher interest- bearing debt compared to the same quarter last year. Losses linked to the SEK exchange rate amounted to NOK -33 (-3) million.  FAIR VALUE ADJUSTMENTS OF INTEREST RATE DERIVATIVES  In the first quarter, long-term market rates (swap rates) rose in both Norway and Sweden. In Norway, the 5-year swap rate rose by 0,04 percentage points to 4,15 %, while the 10-year rate increased by 0,07 percentage points to 4,11 %. In Sweden, the 5-year swap rate rose by 0,17 percentage points to 2,67 %, while the 10-year rate increased by 0,23 percentage points to 2,94 %. As a result of the change in interest rates, the fair value of the Group’s interest rate derivatives increased by NOK 18 (233) million.  CASH FLOW AND LIQUIDITY Q1  Net cash flow from operations was NOK 542 (527) million. Net cash flow from operating activities was 602 (637) million. Investing activities reduced liquidity by NOK -116 (-139) million, while financing activities reduced liquidity by -384 (-479) million. The exchange rate effects on cash and cash equivalents amounted to NOK 2 (0) million, and the Group’s liquidity reserves therefore increased by NOK 104 (19) million. As per 31.03.2025 the liquidity reserves were NOK 10 067 (7 458) million, and consisted of short-term investments of NOK 187 (245) million and undrawn long- term credit facilities of NOK 9 880 (7 213) million.  INVESTMENTS  The Group’s net investments in Q1 were 324 (183) million.  MAJOR PROPERTY PROJECTS 4  Under construction  Lagunen Storsenter, Bergen (42 % stake) A new build extension totalling 15 100 square meters is being added to this shopping center, in addition, the existing center is being expanded by 2 400 square meters. The extension will contain shopping center premises including retail, restaurants and offices, and is scheduled for completion in Q4 2025. Gardermoen Park, Brages vei 3 The warehouse and logistics building next to Oslo Airport in Gardermoen is being expanded by 10 500 square meters, and is fully let. The building is scheduled to be completed in mid-2025. Sanden shopping centre, Kristiansand In Sanden's quarter, a new building of 2 200 square meters is being built in connection with the shopping centre with shop and office premises. In addition, a total rehabilitation of the shopping center is being carried out. The project is scheduled to be completed in the Q3 2025. Jessheim Storsenter, Jessheim The shopping center is being expanded with a new building of 2 200 square meters, along with an underground parking facility featuring 85 parking spaces. The project is scheduled for completion in 2026. Heggedal Hage, Asker (Underlandsveien 6-10) A residential development comprising a total of 7 300 square meters of usable area, with 118 residential units available for sale, has been initiated in proximity to Heggedal train station in Asker Municipality. This project is projected to be completed in 2027.  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 5  4   Above MNOK 50 million

---

In addition to the aforementioned projects, significant rehabilitation initiatives are underway at several of the group's larger properties in the Oslo area.  In planning phase  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA has several property projects in the planning phase. The projects are primarily linked to the further development of its property portfolio. Whether they will be executed depends on factors such as official permits and market conditions.  INVESTMENT PROPERTIES AS AT 31.03.2025  The property portfolio was valued at NOK 59 381 (56 786) million, based on an average yield of 6,1 % (6,0 %) 5 . By the end of the quarter, the property portfolio consisted of a total area of 2,0 million square meters. The vacancy rate in the property portfolio was 3,9 % (3,7 %). The annual rental income level was NOK 4 175 (3 920) million 5.  Average yields by property segment were as follows: Shopping center properties   6,5 % (6,4 %) Commercial properties   5,1 % (5,0 %) The property portfolio consists of the following segment distribution:  Segment   Market value (Share)   Rental income level (Share)  Shopping center properties   74 % (73 %)   79 % (79 %) Commercial properties   26 % (27 %)   21 % (21 %) MNOK  Rental income level  Shopping centers   Commercial properties*  2021   2022   2023   2024   2025  0  500  1 000  1 500  2 000  2 500  3 000  3 500  4 000  4 500  The annual rental income level has increased by 28,5 % in the last 5 years. * Includes retail/office, residential properties and other commercial properties.  PROPERTY PORTFOLIO OWNED THROUGH JOINT VENTURES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES  The Group’s share of the rental income of joint ventures and associated companies was NOK 185 (230) million. The Group’s share of the property values in these companies was NOK 2 842 (3 310) million.  THE SHOPPING CENTER BUSINESS AREA  By the end of the quarter Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA wholly or partly owned 56 shopping centers in Norway and Sweden. Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA is Norway’s leading shopping center actor with a solid market position. The shopping center portfolio includes Norway’s largest shopping center in terms of retail sales, Lagunen Storsenter in Bergen, and five of the country’s eight largest shopping centers.  Retail sales  Retail sales in the Group’s shopping center portfolio in Q1 amounted to NOK 13 402 (13 198) million 6 . The shopping centers had the following retail sales in Q1, broken down by month:  2025   2024   Change  January   4 519   4 310   4,9 % February   4 241   4 298   -1,3 % March   4 642   4 589   1,1 %  Sum Q1   13 402   13 198   1,5 %  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 6  5   For definitions see alternative performance measures (APM) at the end of the report  6   Corresponding period corrected

---

Norway  In Q1, the Group’s Norwegian shopping centers had retail sales of NOK 12 492 (12 278) million.  Sweden  Retail sales in the Swedish shopping centers amounted to SEK 877 (908) million in Q1.  RISK FACTORS  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA is primarily exposed to market and financial risks arising from the real estate and financial markets.  THE PROPERTY MARKET  The development in the property market in Norway and Sweden are affected by macroeconomic development and demand for commercial property as an investment object. The valuation as at 31.03.2025 was based on an average yield of 6,1 %. Throughout the last three years, the yield has varied between 4,9 % and 6,2 %. Changes in yield and market rents have a direct impact on the value of the property portfolio. Calculations of this effect can be found in note 8 in the quarterly report.  THE FINANCIAL MARKET  The most significant financial risk for Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA is considered to be the Group’s access to financing in the banking and capital markets. The risk is mitigated by maintaining a low loan-to-value ratio, a balanced debt portfolio and significant liquidity reserves. The Group’s financing is described in greater depth in the next section, and more details about financial risk management can be found in the annual report 2024.  FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS  The Group’s financial instruments (interest rate swaps) are recorded at fair value. The interest rate swaps are primarily used to hedge long- term fixed-rate periods, and thus reduce the financial risk. At the end of Q1, the portfolio of financial instruments was NOK 22 811 (24 136) million, and is made up by the following groups:  MNOK   Amount  Floating to fixed interest rate   12 123 Fixed to floating interest rate   3 836 Floating to fixed interest rate – future start   6 852  Sum   22 811  At end of the quarter, total fair value was NOK 522 (307) million. Fair value is affected both by changes in long-term interest rates and by the residual term on interest rate derivatives. It is estimated that a change of 1 percentage point in interest rates would change the fair value by approximately NOK 400 - 500 million.  FINANCING  The Group’s debt portfolio consists of long-term credit facilities with Nordic banks and direct borrowing in the capital markets in Norway and Sweden. Access to financing is considered very good in both the bank and capital markets. The Group’s financing sources in Q1 were both the Nordic banking market and the capital markets in Norway and Sweden. In the banking market, long-term loan agreements of NOK 1 150 million was entered into, while in the capital markets, NOK 4 300 million and SEK 775 million new loans was raised.  INTEREST-BEARING DEBT AND MATURITY PROFILE  By end of the quarter outstanding certificate and bond debt amounted to NOK 16 032 (13 383) million, broken down as follows: Norway:   NOK 13 639 (12 469) million Sweden:   SEK 2 275 (900) million Total credit facilities were NOK 30 909 (27 739) million, NOK 9 880 (7 213) million of which was undrawn. For details of the Group’s interest-bearing debt, see notes 11 and 12 and «Alternative performance measures» in the report. The Drawn debt by end of the quarter had an average remaining maturity of 3,4 (3,7) years, with 30 % (14 %) of the debt falling due for repayment within 1 year.  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 7

---

Maturity profile  30 %  51 %  19 %  < 12 months   1-5 years  > 5 years Current liquidity reserves are sufficient to refinance all debt falling due in both the bank and capital markets up until 03.03.2028.  AVERAGE INTEREST RATE AND INTEREST RATE PROFILE  By the end of Q1, the Group had a fixed-rate ratio of 64 % (59 %), with an average fixed-rate period of 2,9 (3,3) years. Interest rates last 5 years  OLT average interest rate (incl. credit margins)  NIBOR 3M  NOK 10Y Swap  Q2  2020  Q1  2021  Q4  2021  Q3  2022  Q2  2023  Q1  2024  Q4  2024  0 %  1 %  2 %  3 %  4 %  5 %  6 %  The Group’s average interest rate (including credit margins) was 4,7 % (5,2 %), divided between the following currencies:  Currency   Share of debt   Average interest rate  NOK   86 % (87 %)   4,9 % (5,3 %) SEK   14 % (13 %)   3,0 % (4,3 %) Interest rate profile  36 %  57 %  7 %  < 12 months   1-5 years  > 5 years  64 % of interest-bearing debt has a fixed-rate period of more than 12 months. The average fixed-rate period is 2,9 year.  SHARE INFORMATION  The closing price of the Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA share was NOK 259 at the end of Q1, up from 224 at the start of the quarter. The highest and lowest prices in the quarter were NOK 263 and 219 respectively. The shares in Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA shares have generated the following return (including dividend) compared to the Oslo Stock Exchange:  Return OLT   OSEBX  Q1 2025   14 %   6 %  Last 12 months   20 %   12 %  Last 24 months   59 %   26 %  Last 36 months   48 %   19 %  Last 60 months   151 %   95 % In Q1 854 000 (586 000) shares were traded and 4 883 (4 005) transactions in the share were conducted on the Oslo Stock Exchange.  SHAREHOLDERS  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA has issued 101 478 908 shares which have equal rights. As at 31.03.2025, Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA had 4 582 (4 177) shareholders, with Norwegian investors owning 94,3 % (96,2 %) of the shares. At the end of the quarter, Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA’s market capitalisation was NOK 26,3 (22,5) billion, and the five largest shareholders were:  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 8

---

Shareholders   Share  Olav Thon Gruppen AS (incl. subs)   75,4 %  J. P. Morgan SE (nom.)   4,6 %  MP Pensjon   2,3 %  Folketrygdfondet   1,2 %  Otto Olsen Invest AS   0,9 %  Others   15,6 %  Total   100 %  OUTLOOK  The growth in the Norwegian economy increased throughout 2024, but remains relatively low. Despite this, unemployment is still low and wage growth is relatively high. After inflation decreased through 2024, it has increased again since the beginning of the year and is now significantly higher than Norges Bank's inflation target. Norges Bank has kept its key policy rate unchanged at 4.50 % since 2023, but is now signaling that it will most likely be cut in the course of 2025. Persistent geopolitical uncertainty, global trade conflicts, and inflation higher than Norges Bank's target contribute to the uncertainty regarding economic developments both in Norway and abroad in the period ahead. The group's solid market position and financial standing are expected to support a continued positive operational performance, despite higher level of interest rate and increasing macroeconomic uncertainty. Oslo, 14. May 2025 Board of Directors, Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA  Every effort has been made to ensure that this translation of the Norwegian text and the report is true translation. However, in case of any discrepancy, the Norwegian version takes place.  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 9

---

OLAV THON EIENDOMSSELSKAP ASA, CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME  (NOK million)   Note   31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Rental income   6   1 009   958   3 807  Property-related income   270   306   1 080  Property-related expenses   6   -361   -399   -1 570  Net rental income   7   918   865   3 317  Other operating income   16   16   75  Other operating expenses   -15   -17   -64  Administrative expenses   6   -59   -47   -196  Depreciation   -3   -3   -13  Net income from property management   7   857   814   3 120  Fair value adjustments, investment property   8   442   63   346  Share of profit from joint ventures and associated companies   9   2   -8   137  Operating profit   7   1 301   869   3 603  Financial income   10   56   51   249  Financial expenses   10   -371   -339   -1 418  Fair value adjustments, interest rate derivatives   18   233   429  Net financial items   -297   -55   -739  Profit before income tax   1 004   814   2 863  Change in deferred tax   -160   -103   -389  Income tax payable   -62   -76   -232  Income tax   -222   -178   -621  Profit   782   635   2 242  Other Comprehensive income:  Items to be reclassified to P&L in subsequent periods:  Currency translation differences from foreign operations   41   4   29  Total comprehensive income   824   639   2 272  Profit attributable to:  Shareholders of the parent   778   633   2 234  Non-controlling interests   4   3   8  Total comprehensive income attributable to:  Shareholders of the parent   819   637   2 263  Non-controlling interests   4   3   8  Earnings per share, basic and diluted (NOK)   8   6   22  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 10

---

OLAV THON EIENDOMSSELSKAP ASA, CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  BALANCE SHEET  (NOK million)   Note   31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  ASSETS  Investment properties   8   59 415   56 796   58 633  Owner-occupied properties   177   184   177  Fixed assets   60   46   55  Investments in joint ventures and associated companies   9   1 770   1 880   1 770  Other non-current assets   912   708   923  Total non-current assets   62 333   59 615   61 558  Trade receivables and other current receivables   1 135   1 106   1 416  Cash and cash equivalents   187   245   83  Total current assets   1 321   1 351   1 499  Total assets   63 655   60 966   63 058  EQUITY AND LIABILITIES  Share capital   101   101   101  Share premium   318   318   318  Other equity   32 059   30 315   31 241  Non-controlling interests   389   358   385  Total equity   32 868   31 093   32 045  Deferred tax liabilities   7 746   7 254   7 585  Lease liabilities   227   207   214  Interest-bearing non-current liabilities   11   14 648   17 652   17 937  Other non-current liabilities   11   119   152   128  Total non-current liabilities   22 741   25 265   25 863  Income tax payable   183   230   244  Interest-bearing current liabilities   12   6 380   2 875   3 405  Trade payables and other current liabilities   12   1 483   1 503   1 500  Total current liabilities   8 046   4 608   5 149  Total liabilities   30 787   29 873   31 012  Total equity and liabilities   63 655   60 966   63 058  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 11

---

OLAV THON EIENDOMSSELSKAP ASA   , CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  STATEMENT OF CASH FLOW  NOK million   31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Net cash flow from operations   542   527   1 953  Expensed interest   325   331   1 357  Paid interest   -317   -290   -1 251  Paid income tax   -123   -154   -296  Change in working capital   175   222   -22  Net cash flow from operating activities   602   637   1 741  Acquisition of investment properties and fixed assets   -257   -112   -732  Acquisition of subsidiaries   –   -17   -901  Other investments   142   -10   164  Net cash flow from investment activities   -116   -139   -1 470  Proceeds from interest-bearing liabilities   6 057   4 801   21 852  Repayment of interest-bearing liabilities   -6 440   -5 278   -21 550  Payment on leasing liabilities   -2   -2   -8  Dividends paid   –   –   -714  Net cash flow from financing activities   -384   -479   -419  Currency translation effects on cash and cash equivalents   2   –   5  Net change in cash   104   19   -143  Cash at beginning of period   83   226   226  Cash at end of period   187   245   83  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 12

---

OLAV THON EIENDOMSSELSKAP ASA   , CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY  (NOK million)   Share capital   Share premium  Currency translation differences   Other equity   Hedging reserve   Shareholders of the parent  Non- controlling interest   Total  Equity 31.12.23   101   318   0   29 689   -12   30 097   340   30 437  Profit   633   633   3   635  Other comprehensive income   4   4   4  Dividends paid   0   0   0   0  Other changes   2   2   15   17  Equity 31.03.24   101   318   4   30 323   -12   30 735   358   31 093  Profit   1 601   1 601   6   1 607  Other comprehensive income   25   25   25  Dividends paid   -710   -710   -4   -714  Other changes   9   9   25   34  Equity 31.12.24   101   318   29   31 223   -12   31 660   385   32 045  Profit   778   778   4   782  Other comprehensive income   41   41   41  Dividends paid   0   0   0   0  Other changes   0   0   0   0  Equity 31.03.25   101   318   70   32 001   -12   32 479   389   32 868  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 13

---

Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA, Consolidated financial statements  NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS  (NOK million)  NOTE 1   GENERAL INFORMATION  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA is based in Norway and is listed on Oslo Stock Exchange. The head office is situated in Oslo. The Group's consolidated financial statements includes Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA and subsidiaries, as well as the Group's interests in joint ventures and associated companies. The Group has activities in Norway and Sweden. The interim financial statements were adopted by the Board on 14 May 2025. There has been no audit of the interim financial information.  NOTE 2   ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES  The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by IASB and as adopted by EU. The consolidated accounts have been prepared in accordance with IAS 34 Interim Financial Reporting. The accounting principles on which the interim report is based are in accordance with the principles used in the preparation of the annual report for 2024.  NOTE 3   CHANGES IN GROUP STRUCTURE  There are no significant changes in the Group structure in the quarter.  NOTE 4   ESTIMATES  Preparation of interim financial statements involves the use of judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect the application of accounting principles and amounts recognised in the Group's position and results. In preparing the interim financial statements, management has used the same assessments related to the application of accounting principles that formed the basis for the consolidated financial statements for 2024.  NOTE 5   SUBSEQUENT EVENTS  No events of significance to the assessment of the Group's position and results have occurred after the reporting date.  NOTE 6   RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS  The company has the following transactions with related parties:  Transactions   Counterparty   31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Rental income   Companies in Thon Holding Group   28   35   119 Property-related expenses   Companies in Thon Holding Group   12   10   40 Operating and administration agreements   Companies in Thon Holding Group   56   44   184  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 14

---

NOTE 7   BUSINESS SEGMENTS  The Group has activities within two strategic business segments and two geographical areas. The segment reporting is based on the internal management reporting.  Operating segments   Geographical areas  31.03.2025   Shopping centers   Commercial property   Other activity   Group   Norway   Sweden   Group  Rental income   814   195   1 009   960   49   1 009 Property-related income   246   24   270   252   18   270 Property-related expenses   -292   -69   -361   -341   -20   -361  Net rental income   767   150   –   918   870   47   918  Other operating income   5   12   16   16   16 Other operating expenses   -7   -8   -15   -15   -15 Administrative expenses   -47   -12   -59   -56   -3   -59 Depreciation   -3   –   -3   -3   –   -3  Net income from property management   715   138   4   857   813   44   857  Fair value adjustments, investment property   466   -24   442   429   13   442 Share of profit from joint ventures & associates   1   –   2   2   2  Operating profit   1 183   114   4   1 301   1 244   57   1 301  Operating segments   Geographical areas  31.03.24*   Shopping centers   Commercial property   Other activity   Group   Norway   Sweden   Group  Rental income   749   209   958   896   62   958 Property-related income   255   50   306   286   19   306 Property-related expenses   -337   -62   -399   -362   -36   -399  Net rental income   668   197   –   865   820   45   865  Other operating income*   6   11   16   16   16 Other operating expenses   -9   -8   -17   -17   -17 Administrative expenses   -37   -10   -47   -42   -4   -47 Depreciation   -3   –   -3   -3   –   -3  Net income from property management   625   187   2   814   774   41   814  Fair value adjustments, investment property   128   -65   63   48   14   63 Share of profit from joint ventures & associates   -8   –   -8   -8   -8  Operating profit   744   122   2   869   814   55   869  *The segment reporting between the shopping centers and the commercial property is changed in the comparative figures following a renewed assessment of the parking business.  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 15

---

Operating segments   Geographical areas  31.12.24*   Shopping centers   Commercial property   Other activity   Group   Norway   Sweden   Group  Rental income   2 990   817   3 807   3 566   242   3 807  Property-related income   937   143   1 080   1 005   75   1 080  Property-related expenses   -1 334   -236   -1 570   -1 432   -138   -1 570  Net rental income   2 592   725   –   3 317   3 139   179   3 317  Other operating income   35   40   75   75   75  Other operating expenses   -34   -29   -64   -64   -64  Administrative expenses   -156   -41   -196   -181   -16   -196  Depreciation   -11   -2   -13   -13   -0   -13  Net income from property management   2 427   682   11   3 120   2 957   163   3 120  Fair value adjustments, investment property   448   -102   346   366   -20   346  Share of profit from joint ventures & associates   139   -2   137   137   137  Operating profit   3 014   578   11   3 603   3 460   143   3 603  NOTE 8   INVESTMENT PROPERTY  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Investment property - owned - fair value 01.01   58 427   56 382   56 382 Investment property - right-of-use-assets - fair value 01.01   206   195   195  Sum investment property - fair value 01.01   58 633   56 577   56 577  Acquisitions/expenditure on properties   250   109   707 Acquisitions and divestments companies/investment property   –   36   930 Change in fair value recognised in the period   445   65   357 Change in fair value right-of-use-assets recognised in the period   -3   -3   -11 Net other changes right to use assets   16   4   21 Effect of currency exchange differences in foreign operations   74   7   52 Other changes   –   –   –  Closing balance   59 415   56 796   58 633  of this investment property - owned   59 196   56 599   58 427 of this investment property - right-of-use-assets   219   197   206 The table below presents a sensitivity analysis at the balance sheet date, showing changes in fair value of owned investment properties when yield and rent levels is changed.  Fair value   Rent level  Investment property (owned)   -10 %   Unchanged   +10 %  -1,0 %-points   63 619   70 633   77 647 - 0,5 %-points   58 032   64 426   70 819 Unchanged   53 354   59 196   65 102 + 0,5 %-points   49 380   54 812   60 244 + 1,0 %-points   45 961   51 013   56 065  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 16

---

NOTE 9   JOINT VENTURES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES  The table below shows underlying figures in the income statement and financial position for joint ventures and associated companies.  Joint ventures   31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Net rental income   40   56   220 Fair value adjustments, investment property   -13   -43   4 Fair value adjustments, interest rate derivatives   -8   5   5 Expenses*   -26   -32   -102 Income taxes   2   –   -11  Profit   -5   -14   116  Investment properties   1 978   2 459   1 949 Other assets   198   195   204  Total assets   2 176   2 654   2 152  Equity   1 225   1 348   1 231 Non-current liabilities   860   1 191   865 Current liabilities   91   115   56  Total equity and liabilities   2 176   2 654   2 152  Associated companies   31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Net rental income   16   16   66 Fair value adjustments, investment property   -1   –   -10 Expenses   -7   -8   -29 Income taxes   -2   -2   -6  Profit   6   6   20  Investment properties   882   890   882 Other assets   109   84   101  Total assets   990   974   983  Equity   545   532   539 Non-current liabilities   422   422   421 Current liabilities   24   20   24  Total equity and liabilities   990   974   983  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 17

---

NOTE 10   FINANCIAL INCOME AND FINANCIAL EXPENSES  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Interest income   12   8   41  Interest income derivatives   44   43   160  Currency gain   –   –   –  Bond buyback   –   –   46  Other financial income   –   –   3  Total financial income   56   51   249  Interest expenses bonds   -167   -159   -668  Interest expenses commercial papers   -28   -10   -98  Interest expenses derivatives   -16   -23   -82  Other interest expenses   -100   -126   -409  Interest expenses related to lease liabilities   -4   -3   -13  Terminating derivatives *   -11   -10   -86  Currency loss   -33   -3   -24  Other financial expenses   -13   -5   -37  Total financial expenses   -371   -339   -1 418  Currency items  Currency translation differences from foreign operations   41   4   29  Currency translation effects on cash and cash equivalents   2   –   5  Other currency items   -34   -3   -29  Total currency effects   9   1   5  NOTE 11   NON-CURRENT LIABILITIES  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Bonds   10 972   10 536   10 801  Other interest-bearing liabilities   3 676   7 116   7 135  Total Interest-bearing current liabilities   14 648   17 652   17 937  Fair value interest rate swaps*   71   107   84  Other liabilities   48   46   44  Total non-current liabilities   119   152   128  * The long-term part of interest rate swaps with a positive fair value of NOK 458 million (337) as at 31.03.2025, is classified as other non-current assets.  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 18

---

NOTE 12   CURRENT LIABILITIES  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Commercial papers   3 010   853   257  Bonds   2 050   1 994   1 885  Bank loans   1 320   28   1 263  Total Interest-bearing current liabilities   6 380   2 875   3 405  Fair value interest rate swaps*   23   58   23  Lease liabilities   8   8   7  Trade payables   202   189   179  Accrued interest   189   116   180  Duties payable   146   203   111  Prepaid rent   677   718   785  Other current liabilities   238   210   215  Total trade payables and other current liabilities   1 483   1 503   1 500  * The short-term part of interest rate swaps with a positive fair value of NOK 158 million (134) as at 31.03.2025, is classified as trade receivables and other current receivables.  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 19

---

OLAV THON EIENDOMSSELSKAP ASA, CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ALTERNATIVE PERFORMANCE MEASURES  Amounts in NOK million Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA prepares consolidated financial statements in accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The company also wishes to present alternative performance measures (APM) in order to provide readers with a better understanding of the company's underlying financial results.  1. Fair value adjustments in investment properties and interest rate derivatives  Fair value adjustments in investment properties and interest rate derivatives affect the Group's profit before tax. These income statement items are considered to be more determined by external factors than the other profit and loss items.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Fair value adjustments in: investment properties recognised in profit and loss   442   63   346 investment properties in joint ventures   -13   -43   4 investment properties in associated companies   -1   –   -10 interest rate derivatives recognised in profit and loss   18   233   429 interest rate derivatives in joint ventures   -8   5   5  Fair value adjustments, investment properties and derivatives   439   257   774  2. Profit before income tax, fair value adjustment and currency result  Profit before tax, fair value adjustments and currency is intended to give readers a better understanding of the Group's operating business development.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Profit before income tax   1 004   814   2 863 Income tax in joint ventures   -2   –   11 Income tax in associated companies   2   2   6 Fair value adjustments investment properties and derivatives   -439   -257   -774 Currency gain   –   –   – Currency loss   33   3   24  Profit before income tax, fair value adjustment and currency result   598   562   2 129  3. Equity ratio  Equity ratio is the Group's total book equity divided by the Group's total equity and debt on the balance sheet date, and indicates the relative proportion of equity used to finance a company's assets.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Total equity   32 868   31 093   32 045 Total equity and debt   63 655   60 966   63 058 Equity ratio   52 %   51 %   51 %  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 20

---

4. Long term net asset value per share and equity per share  Long term net asset value per share takes into account a fair value assessment of the deferred tax liabilities. Equity per share is calculated as the majority's share of equity divided by the number of shares.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Majority share of equity   32 479   30 735   31 660 Deferred tax liabilities (deferred tax liabilities current assets excluded)   7 754   7 292   7 623 Fair value of debt - deferred tax liabilities - 6 %   -2 115   -1 989   -2 079  Long term net asset value   38 118   36 038   37 204  Number of shares (own shares not included)   101 478 908   101 478 908   101 478 908  Long term net asset value per share in NOK   376   355   367  Equity per share in NOK   320   303   312  5. Liquidity reserves  Calculation of liquidity reserves is considered to give the reader a better understanding of the Group's ability to service short-term liquidity needs.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Unutilized overdrafts and other credit facilities   9 880   7 213   6 478 Cash and cash equivalents   187   245   83  Liquidity reserves   10 067   7 458   6 561  6. Amortisation next 12 months  Amortisation for the next 12 months show interest-bearing debt that falls due over the next 12 months, and provides a picture of the Group's future obligations.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Commercial papers   3 010   853   257 Bonds   2 050   1 994   1 885 Bank loans   1 320   28   1 263  Amortisation next 12 months   6 380   2 875   3 405  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 21

---

7. Net Interest-bearing debt and loan to value ratio  Splitting the Group's total debt into interest-bearing debt and non-interest-bearing debt is intended to give readers a better understanding of the Group's debt situation and the Group's financial position. Net interest-bearing debt is calculated by deducting the Group's cash and cash equivalents from its interest-bearing debt. Net interest-bearing debt is used in, among other things, the calculation of the Group's loan to value ratio.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Bonds, non-current   10 972   10 536   10 801 Bonds, current   2 050   1 994   1 885 Commercial papers, current   3 010   853   257 Debt to credit institutions, long-term   3 676   7 116   7 135 Debt to credit institutions, short-term   1 320   28   1 263  Interest-bearing debt   1)   21 028   20 526   21 342  Cash and cash equivalents   -187   -245   -83  Net interest-bearing debt   20 842   20 282   21 259  Market value properties (see APM 11)   59 381   56 786   58 612  Loan to value ratio   35 %   36 %   36 %  1)   Unsecured part of interest-bearing debt (where the Group has not provided collateral)   16 032   13 383   12 943  8. Interest per balance sheet date  Interest on the balance sheet date is accounted interest expenses on the balance sheet date converted to annualized interest divided by interest-bearing debt on the balance sheet date.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Annualized interest expenses on interest-bearing debt   1 109   1 105   1 187 Annualized interest expenses on current interest rate swaps   -127   -40   -137  Annualized interest expenses per balance sheet date   982   1 066   1 049  Interest-bearing debt   21 028   20 526   21 342  Interest per balance sheet date   4,67 %   5,19 %   4,92 %  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 22

---

9. Interest coverage ratio  The interest coverage ratio shows the Group's ability to pay its interest obligations. It is calculated by dividing the net income from property management before depreciation (12-month rolling) on net interest expenses from interest-bearing debt (12-month rolling).  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Net income from property management (12-month rolling)   3 162   3 186   3 120 Depreciation (12-month rolling)   12   15   13  Net income from property management before depreciation (12-month rolling)   3 175   3 201   3 133  Interest expenses on interest-bearing debt (12-month rolling)   1 251   1 130   1 258 Interest income (12-month rolling)   -206   -70   -201  Net interest expenses (12-month rolling)   1 045   1 060   1 057  Interest coverage ratio   3,0   3,0   3,0  10. Net investments  Net investments is calculated by using fair value of investments in investment properties in addition to net supply of other fixed assets and other investments.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Investment properties   250   109   707 Acquisitions and divestments companies   –   17   902 Other fixed assets   8   3   13 Other investments   66   54   142  Net investments   324   183   1 763  11. Market value properties  Market value of properties shows the sum of the market value of investment properties owned and owner-occupied properties, which are accounted for according to different accounting principles in the Group's balance sheet. The market value does not include investment property defined as right-to-use assets.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Market value investment properties - owned (see note 8)   59 196   56 599   58 427 Market value owner-occupied properties   185   187   185  Market value properties   59 381   56 786   58 612  In addition, the Group owns properties through joint ventures and associated companies: Market value of properties joint venture (Group share)   1 960   2 420   1 931 Market value of properties associated companies (Group share)   882   890   882  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 23

---

12. Annualized rental income level  The annualized rental income level shows the real estate portfolio's expected market rent for leased and vacant premises, and provides a picture of the Group's earning potential.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Annualized market rent leased premises   4 012   3 775   3 968 Annualized market rent vacant premises   163   145   157  Annualized rental income level   4 175   3 920   4 125  In addition, the Group owns properties through joint ventures and associated companies: Annualized market rent leased premises (Groups share)   177   224   177 Annualized market rent vacant premises (Groups share)   8   6   8  Annualized rental income JVs and associated companies (Groups share)   185   230   185  Total annualized rental income level   4 360   4 150   4 310  13. Yield properties  Yield is the annualized rental income level less normalized (over time) lessor's owner costs divided by the market value of properties adjusted for plots and the relevant non-rental part of properties.  31.03.2025   31.03.2024   31.12.2024  Annualized rental income level   4 175   3 920   4 125 Lessor's owner cost   554   533   542  Annualized net rental income level   3 621   3 387   3 583  Market value properties   59 381   56 786   58 612 Adjustment market value for plots etc.   491   606   437  Market value properties after adjustment   58 890   56 179   58 175  Yield properties   6,1%   6,0%   6,2%  Olav Thon Eiendomsselskap ASA - Report for Q1 2025  Page 24

---

OLAV THON EIENDOMSSELSKAP ASA STENERSGATA 2A POST BOX 489 SENTRUM 0105 OSLO TEL.: +47 23 08 00 00 E-mail: firmapost.olt@olavthon.no  olt.no