Corporate Rating Methodology   –   Commercial Real Estate   –   March   202 3  Rating Methodology   for   Real  Estate   Investment   Companies   &  Real Estate Transactions

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  2  1.   SCOPE OF RATED UNIVERSE   ................................ ................................ ................................ .   4  1.1. REICs   4  1.2. RETs   4  2.   RATING FRAMEWORK FOR REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT COMPANIES   ................................ ......   6  2.1 BUSINESS RISK PROFILE   9  2.1.1 Quality of the real estate assets   9  2.1.1.1 Asset attractiveness   9  2.1.1.2   Weighted average of unexpired lease term (WAULT)   11  2.1.1.3 Tenants’ creditworthiness   12  2.1.1.4 Vacancy levels   12  2.1.1.5 Energy efficiency   13  2.1.1.6 Physical Risks   14  2.1.2 Scale and diversification   16  2.1.2.1 Asset Diversification   16  2.1.2.2 Scale   18  2.1.3 Governance   18  2.2 FINANCIAL RISK PROFILE   19  2.2.1 Cash flow (leverage and coverage)   19  2.2.2 Capitalisation   20  2.2.3 Asset availability   20  2.3 RATING MODIFIERS   20  2.3.1 Liquidity   21  2.3.2 Country Risk   21  2.3.3 ESG - related controversies   21  3.   RATING FRAMEWORK FOR REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS ................................ ....................   22  3.1 ASSET RISK PROFILE   24  3.1.1   Assessing the asset risk profile   24  3.1.1.1 Asset attractiveness   24  3.1.1.2 Weighted average unexpired lease terms   25  3.1.1.3 Tenants’ creditworthiness.   25  3.1.1.4 Vacancy   25

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  3  3.1.1.5 Energy performance profile   25  3.1.1.6 Physical Risks   25  3.2   FINANCIAL RISK PROFILE   25  3.2.1 Assessing the   financial   risk profile   25  3.2.1.1 Loan To value   25  3.2.1.2 Interest Coverage Ratio and Debt Service Coverage Ratio   26  3.2.1.3   Financial risk profile assessment clarification   26  3.3   ETHIFINANCE RATINGS’ SCORECARD WITH CONSTRUCTION RISK   27  3.4   RATING MODIFIERS   29  3.4.1 Liquidity   29  3.4.2 Country risk   29  3.4.3 Insurance policy   29  4 APPENDIX   ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................   31  4.1 RATIO DEFINITIONS   31

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  4  1.   SCOPE OF RATED UNIVERSE  This document   details   the methodologies to rate Real Estate   Investment   Companies (RE I Cs) as well as Real  Estate Transactions (RETs). It is therefore split in to   two main parts ,   with section 2 for the RE I Cs and section  3 for the RETs.  1.1. RE I Cs  We define RE I Cs as corporate entities that are primarily engaged in owning and managing a portfolio of  Real Estate (RE) assets with a long - term investment horizon. A RE I C can also engage into corporate actions  such as M&A of another RE I C or selling part of its activities.  Typically, these   REICs   will hold   a minimum of 80% of their assets in real estate properties and   will generate  income   that   is   primarily derived from the rental of these properties.  Real Estate developers are not included in this universe of firms   but   are   covered by the Gener al   Corporate  Methodology .  RE I Cs can   be standard Limited Companies   but ,   in many cases ,   they are incorp orated as R eal Estate  Investment Trusts (R EITs )   for tax purposes.   For REITs to   enjoy their special tax regime they typically   must  distribute   most of their taxable income   and therefore usually do not hold significant cash balances.   In most  jurisdictions,   REITs are allowed to deduct paid dividends from their taxable income . This   may confer certain  tax benefits to their shareholders , depending on the   applicable jurisdiction .   Other RE I Cs are not required  to distribute   dividends but usually choose to do so.  RE I Cs that are covered   by   this analytical framework   may   hold residential property and derive their sales  from renting these homes to individuals   or they may   hold different types of commercial real estate   assets  (offices, shopping   centres , logistics, hotels, warehouses, etc) and derive their   income   from renting these to  corporate tenants.   They may also hold a mix of residential and commercial properties .  This framework only deals with the issuer ratings assigned to RE I Cs .   Instruments issued by a RE I C   are  covered by our   G ener al   Corporate M ethodology, specifically   section   5   that covers instrument ratings.  1.2.   RETs  By opposition   to RE I Cs , w e define RETs as self - financing special - purpose vehicles (SPVs)   -   or holding  companies with activity limited to the ownership of   one or several   SPV   -   whose debt is serviced via the  rental income generated by the underlying real estate asset or via the disposal of the asset, or a mix of  both.  The ring - fenced perimeter   of RETs   is   notably   what differentiates   them   from RE I Cs   and   what therefore  justifies different approaches to   their ratings .   There is also typically a charter for the entity that is

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  5  significantly more restrictive compared to RE I Cs ,   and   that   is part of the legal structure of the real estate  transaction .  RETs are generally used when there is a real estate sponsor that   invests   in one o r   several real estate assets  or when a corporate owns some real estate assets and wants to finance   it outside of its corporate debt  structure.

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  6  2.   RATING FRAMEWORK FOR REAL ESTATE   INVESTMENT  COMPANIES  EthiFinance Ratings uses a common framework to analy s e the creditworthiness of   c orporates. Under the  umbrella of this framework, EthiFinance Ratings is publishing a sector - specific methodology for   REICs   that is  based on the corporate framework but at the same time addresses the   specificities   of this sector.  RE I Cs having common   characteristics with   other corporates, s ome   of the   analytical factors   are common   to  both methodologies   and   can be   found in the   General   Corporate Methodology.  Credit r atings assigned by EthiFinance   Ratings   are based on the   analysis of qualitative factors   that qualify  the Business Risk Profile   (BRP) of the RE I C ,   and quantitative factors   that determine   its   Financial Risk Profile  (FRP) , which are then adjusted with modifiers (see Table 1). The combination of the scores from the   BRP  and the FRP , with the influence of ESG factors,   lead to   the Anchor Rating. To arrive at the Issuer Credit  Rating, EthiFinance   Ratings   adjusts the Anchor Rating based on the scoring of three additional risk factors:  ESG - related controversies, the compa ny’s liquidity position and country risks.  Table 1   –   EthiFinance Ratings Methodology for RE I Cs  Table   1   shows how EthiFinance   Rating   arrives at the Anchor Rating. First, each of the Business and Financial  risk profiles is assessed separately based on their respective risk subfactors.   The   Q uality of   Assets   f a ctor  may be negatively   impacted   by   Physical Risks considerations . The resulting Business and Financial profile  scores are then weighed to arrive at the Anchor rating.  The   RE I C ’s business risk profile   is assessed using the following analytic al   factors: ANCHOR RATING   MODIFIERS   ISSUER RATING  BRP   FRP  Quality of  assets  Scale and  diversification  Governance  Cash flow &  leverage  Solvency  Asset  availability  Physical  risks  modifier  ESG  Controversies  Liquidity  Country risk

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  7  •   Quality of   the   R eal   E state   Assets  •   Scale and diversification  •   Governance  The   RE I C ’s financial   r isk profile   is assessed using the following analytic al   factors:  •   Cash Flow and Leverage  •   Solvency  •   Asset availability  Table 2   –   EthiFinance Ratings ’   RE I Cs   Anchor Rating  Business Risk Profile   50%  Quality of   the   R eal   E state   Assets   30 %  Asset Location   10%  W eighted Avg. Unexpired   Lease Term (WAULT)   5%  Tenants’ creditworthiness   5%  Vacancy Levels   5%  Energy Efficiency   5%  Company’s   scale and diversification   1 0 %  Diversification   5%  Scale   5%  Governance   10%  Financial Policy / Management   5%  Shareholding and Control Structure   5%  Financial Risk Profile   50%  Cash flow and   Leverage   25%  NFD/ EBITDA   (x)   10%  EBITDA   / interest (x)   15%  Capitali s ation   15%  Debt/GAV (%)   15%  Asset availability   10%  Unencumbered Assets/GAV   10%  For   both profiles, a   score   between   [ 1 and   8 [   is   assigned   to   each of the subfactors ,   where 1 is the best and  7.9   is the worst.   They are then combined based on the weight s   presented in Table 2

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  8  To arrive at the Anchor rating, EthiFinance   Ratings   translates the combined score of the Business and  Financial risk profiles into a rating based on the mapping presented in Table   3 .  Table   3   –   Alphanumeric mapping for the Anchor rating  AAA   AA+   AA   AA -   A+   A   A -   BBB+   BBB   BBB -   BB+   BB   BB -   B+   B   B -   CCC  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   –   8[  The highest grade of each rating category (AAA, AA+, A+, BBB+, BB+, B+, CCC+) corresponds to the whole  number of the 1   –   7 numeric scale. The boundaries of all ratings are established through a linear  interpolation to the   nearest third of a whole number. For example, an Anchor rating score between 3.0 0  and 3.33 translates into an ‘A+’, whereas an Anchor score between 3.34 and 3.67 would translate into an  ‘A’ rating.   Finally, this methodology maps the numeric rating resulting from the rating process into the  Long - Term Rating Scale used by EthiFinance Ratings .   F or more   information,   please refer to our   Rating  Scales & Definitions   document .

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  9  2.1   BUSINESS RISK PROFILE  The following   sub f actors are taken into consideration when assessing the business profile score:  •   Quality of   the   r eal   e state   assets  •   Competitive Positioning  •   Governance  2.1.1   Quality of   the   r eal   e state assets  The quality of the   r eal   e state ass ets held by the RE I C is one of the main drivers of the rating.   A high qu ality  RE portfolio will   usually generate above - market rents,   attracting   the best tenants in terms of  creditworthiness,   will be more resilient to   downturns in the RE market and   will be easier to sell   at higher  prices in   the event   of liquidity needs.   The following sub factors are applicable in order to   evaluate the  attractiveness   of   a RE I C’s   real estate portfolio :  •   Asset Location (Centre Business District, Tier1,   Periphery , etc.)  •   Weighted average of unexpired lease term (WAULT)  •   Tenants’ creditworthiness  •   Vacancy   Levels  •   Energy Efficiency  Once the Quality of Assets factor has been scored, EthiFinance Ratings will assess the exposure of the  portfolio to physical risks. To do this ,   we will use our proprietary Physical Risks Scores   Framework   (PRS F ) to  quantitively assess a wide range of physical risks of the portfolio of assets based on their geographical  location.   S ection   2.1.1. 6   explains how it wor ks and its potential impact on the rating.  2.1.1.1 Asset attractiveness  A   high - quality   real estate   portfolio will usually generate above - market rents, attracting the best tenants in  terms of creditworthiness, will be more resilient to downturns in the   real estate   market and will be easier  to sell at higher prices in   the event   of liquidity needs.  A third - party expert assessment report   and market comparisons (where   applicable )   are used by   EthiFinance  Ratings   to assess   asset attractiveness.  As a rule   of thumb , location is the main driver of the score   as   indicated   in   Table 4 .   The AAA class reflects a  very strong asset appraisal corresponding to a prime asset, typically corresponding to a location in the  centre of “global cities” such as Paris, London, New York. The BBB class corresponds to a location quite  distant from the cent re of cities with at least national attractions.   In France   and Spain for instance , national  attractions can be defined, but not exclusively, as the capitals of the regions. If suc h an urban area was  exposed to demographic erosion, EthiFinance Ratings may lower this score, to reflect a likely decline in

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  10  attractiveness.   Where applicable, EthiFinance Ratings may use   statistical information provided by national  institute s such as INSEE i n France .  Even though location is the main driver of the asset attractiveness, its connection to transport  infrastructure is key or even sometime s   essential. In the event an asset is characterized by poor  connections, EthiFinance Ratings may apply a discount to its score. In this respect, EthiFinance Ratings will  consider for an “urban asset” its distance to a train/metro/bus station (> 1km or >15 m inutes walking will  be considered as quite distant, although transportation frequency will also be   factored in ). For a  c ommercial centre, the distance to its catchment area and parking availability, as well as competition from  other commercial centres, will be assessed. For a warehouse its distance to the highway will be considered.  EthiFinance Ratings expects such   information   to be disclosed in   a   third - party assessment   report   or   to   be  accessible via public sources , including   -   but not limited to   -   financial statements for listed RE I Cs .   In the  event that third - party technical reports highlight material   risks   for a given asset , EthiFinance Ratings may  lower its asset attractiveness score. Such risks can be related for instance to metal decommissioning.  Table   4   –   Asset attractiveness  1 - 2   3   4   5   6   7  “Trophy”  assets located  in the centre  business  districts of  global gateway  cities. Clear  track record of  very strong  demand  resulting in  well above -  average  rentals. Assets  with a high  degree of cash  flow stability  and that are  highly liquid .  Prime assets  located in the  centre of  regional  gateway cities.  Clear track  record of  strong demand  resulting in  above - average  rentals. Fairly  high degree of  cash flow  stability and  liquidity .  Mostly prime  assets located  in the centre  of the larger  cities within a  region of  countries with  some assets in  the periphery.  A track record  of medium  demand  resulting in  average  rentals. Cash  flow and  liquidity  stability mirror  those of the RE  market .  A mix of assets  located in the  centre and  periphery of  larger cities  within a  country. A  track record of  weaker  demand than  the market  resulting in  below - average  rentals.  Degree of cash  flow stability  and liquidity  are below  those of the RE  market .  Assets mostly  located in the  periphery of  larger cities  within a  country.  Demand and  rentals are  well below the  sector and  cash flow  generated by  the assets are  unstable and  the properties  are   rather  illiquid .  Assets located  in the  periphery of  smaller cities  within a  country.  Demand and  rentals are far  below the  sector and  cash flow  generated by  the assets are  unstable and  the assets are  illiquid .  The section   below   provides some indications on how we   generally view the   following   r eal estate assets  classes   regarding   asset attractiveness.  Office s :   L ocation   is paramount   to   assess if   an   office   is in a prime area where demand is expected to   be  strong ,   or   at the other   end   of the spectrum ,   in   the   periphery of a city   that   can   sometimes   experience   excess  supply   or   significant swings in demand .   Such a location is exposed to   deteriorated   rental rates and  decreasing prices in   the event   of a sale.   Consequently, asset attractiveness scores   for this category   can   be  assigned using the   full   range.

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  11  Commercial   centres :   this class of real estate   asset s   is more and more exposed to   the competition   from  online retail and   to the challenges   posed by   the sustainability of consumer consumption . Commercial  centres   have started to widen their offer ,   evolving   from a   traditional   consumption   centre   to   a   more multi -  purpose   eat - and - meet   s hopping   place   where   location is a key factor .   Consequently, asset attractiveness  scores for this category can be assigned using the   full   range.  Industrial   site s :   L ocation is   usually   at the boundaries of   cit y centre s . Additionally,   significant moving costs  (fitting and installation costs)   mak e   it challenging   for   tenant s   to move elsewhere ,   and for landlord s   to   find  another tenant elsewhere.   Consequently ,   asset attractiveness   scores for this category usually lie   in the  bottom - half   part of the   range .  Data   centres :   this class of rea l   estate asset s   presents very   specific   characteristics.   Not exposed to public  attendance, location mostly relies on the proximity to energy centres . Moreover,   the increasing need for  data storage   has   boosted demand   over the   p ast few years .   Consequently, asset attractiveness scores for  this category usually lie in the middle part of the range.  Residential :   this class of real estate asset s , which is not commercial ,   is   mainly driven by   demographic and  economic trends .   Additionally, the sector is   particularly sensitive to   any   change   in the   regulation   related   to  energy consumption.   Consequently, asset attractiveness scores for this category usually lie in the   top - half  part of the range .  Operated collective   housing:   this class of real estate assets include s   collective housing such as student  hous ing , senior   hous ing   or hotels ,   which   are rented to   one or several   operator s   by   the   real estate owner.  These assets r el y   on the   credit quality of the   operator   -   which   derives   mainly   from   efficient   management   of  the real estate asset   –   as well as   the   interchangeability   of the real estate asset .   Consequently, asset  attractiveness scores for this category usually lie in the middle part of the range.  2.1.1.2   Weighted average of unexpired lease term (WAULT)  The   rental income of a RE I C is linked to its real estate portfolio and the   related leases   contracts with the  tenants . The longer the average unexpired lease term ,   the higher the   visibility   on   the rental income ,   and   by  extension   on   profitability and cashflow .  It is assessed by calculating the weighted average of unexpired lease term .  Table   5   –   Weighted av e r ag e of unexpired lease term (WA ULT)  Categories   1   2   3   4   5   6   7  WAULT   10   y ears  <  WAULT  7   y ears   ≤  WAULT   <  10   y ears  5   y ears   ≤  WAULT   <  7   years  4 years ≤  WAULT <  5 years  3 years ≤  WAULT <   4  years  2 years ≤  WAULT <   3  year s  1 year   ≤  WAULT   <   2  year s  In the case of residential real estate assets , the WAULT criteria is not applicable and as such the criteria is  removed from the   quality of the real estate assessment,   the other criteri a   having their weight increased   by  the same proportion   in order to still reach a total of 30%.

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  12  2.1.1.3   Tenants’ creditworthiness  The tenant quality criterion is a qualitative assessment. Under this assessment, EthiFinance Ratings pays  attention to multiple characteristics, such as tenant   concentration, the credit quality of tenants, the  characteristics of lease terms, and rent levels vs market levels. A strong tenant quality mitigates the risk of  cash flow losses, particularly during stressed periods.   The table below   shows the   tenants’ credit standing  when the diversification of tenants   and the lease terms or rent levels are   satisfactory. If there is high   tenant  concentration   ( the main tenant represents more than 50% of the portfolio in value or rental income, or the  3 main tenants represen t more than 66%) , a denotching   of up to one category   can be made   on table 6 .  Table   6   –   Tenants’ credit standing  Categories   1   2   3   4   5   6   7  Tenants  credit  standing  Main  tenants  have an  average  credit  score in  the A A  category  or above  Main  tenants  have an  average  credit  score in  the A  category  Main  tenants  have an  average  credit  score  between  BBB and  BBB+  Main  tenants  have an  average  credit  score  between  BB+ and  BBB -  Main  tenants  have an  average  credit score  between  BB and BB -  Main  tenants  have an  average  credit  score of B+  and B  Main  tenants  have an  average  credit score  of B -   or  lower  In the case of residential real estate assets, the tenant creditworthiness criteri on   is not applicable ,   and as  such th is   criteri on   is removed from the quality of the real estate assessment, the other criteri a   having their  weight increased by the same proportion in order to still reach a total of 30%.  2.1.1.4 Vacancy levels  Vacancy rates are a fundamental real estate indicator. Vacancy quantitively captures the attractiveness of  an asset. A significant vacancy rate may indicate that the asset is not competitive (especially if it is   located  in attractive areas) and may result in lower profitability & cash generation,   and by extension   in a worse  credit risk profile.  The vacancy rate considered by EthiFinance Ratings is commercial vacancy. As such, the vacancy does not  consider technical vacancy typically linked to maintenance, refurbishment, scrapping etc. The vacancy is  computed in terms of financial vacancy and not   physical vacancy.  The vacancy ratio computed by EthiFinance Ratings is a mix between the   prospective   vacancy and the  historical vacancy with an equal weight for each. EthiFinance Ratings will retain up to   5   periods (last   2   years  + 3 - year forecast s ). For the historical vacancy, EthiFinance Ratings may decide to exclude some periods if  they are considered outliers.

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  13  Table   7   –   Vacancy level s  Categories   1   2   3   4   5   6   7  Vacancy  level s  Vac <  2,5%  2,5%   ≤   Vac  <   4,0 %  4 , 0 % ≤  Vac <  7 ,0%  7 , 0 % ≤ Vac  <   10 ,0%  10 , 0 % ≤  Vac <  15, 0%  15,0 % ≤  Vac <  20,0 %  20% ≤ Vac  2.1.1.5 Energy efficiency  Energy efficiency is a key environmental indicator because energy efficiencies policies will require  significant investments, reducing the attractiveness of a real estate asset and its future profitability and  valuation. Energy efficiency is assessed throu gh the energy consumption of the real estate asset.  EthiFinance Ratings only uses the report related to energy consumption and not the report related to  carbon emissions. EthiFinance Ratings believes that energy consumption is more credit risk - relevant than  the carbon efficiency report given that carbon emi ssion s   could be subject to the national energy mix.  Furthermore, any   government   decision   to change its energy mix   -   via for instance the subsidies of certain  energy assets (such as renewables) or amendment to its nuclear policy   -   could have a significant i mpact on  the carbon performance over time while a particular asset may   not   have changed materially.  The assessment will be made through the energy class which is the predominant source. In   Europe ,  residential assets are classified into 7 categories, ranking from A to G, which translates into EthiFinance  Ratings’ grid   from   AAA   down   to CCC. If such an assessment is not available (for legal reasons), EthiFinance  Ratings will request details of energy consumption and compute a relative value performance, using  publicly available   information   and requirements . If this option too is not available, EthiFinance Ratings will  base its assessment on discussions with   the rated entity   ( or   the   third - party request ing the rating ) ,   using   a  conservative approach. For instance, if the energy consumption   is   not relevant following   a   refurbishment,  EthiFinance Ratings may use management estimates, but will potentially not retain the full planned energy  saving in its assessment.  Table   8   –   Energy efficiency  Categories   1   2   3   4   5   6   7  Energy  efficiency  A   B   C   D   E   F   G

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  14  2.1.1.6   Physical Risks  Physical risks are a specific case of the environment impacting a   real estate asset   through natural disasters ,  long term effects of climate change,   or extreme weather conditions. These types of risks directly affect the  operation   of the tenant of a real estate asset   and could also affect its attractiveness and valuation .  T herefore ,   EthiFinance   Ratings   could potentially adjust   the   Q uality of the   R eal   E state assets as a result of  the physical risk assessment .  EthiFinance   Ratings   strongly believes that physical risks are a key credit factor when rating different types  of corporates but especially in the case of   REICs   whose assets are situated in one or several locations and,  by definition, cannot be relocated. EthiFinance   Ratings   uses a proprietary   framework   (Physical Risks Scores  Framework   –   PRS F ) to quantitively assess a wide range of physical risks for an asset or a portfolio of assets  based on their geographical location. The entry data of the PRS F   is the pr ecise geographical position of the  asset (i.e., latitude and longitude of a building , location ), or the most precise administrative region to which  the asset belongs. Then for each risk, one or several specific databases are used to determine the score  based on an approach of damage functions , whenever they exist ,   which   quantify the risks related to climate  change ,   or based on limit values largely used by the scientific community. The damage functions   or limit  values   convert the hazard intensities into a proportion of assets affected resulting in a   specific   physical risk  exposure which is classified as ‘very low’, ‘low’, ‘medium’, ‘high’, ‘very high’ . High   risk exposure   do es   not  automatically impact the   quality of the real estate assets   factor but rather   is   used as an alert tool to signal  that the potential risk must be further investigated by the analyst as describe d in the Qualitative Analysis  paragraph.  Quantitative analysis. Physical risks considered are i) chronic or, ii) acute. Chronic risks are related to a shift  of the mean climate that can have ongoing effects on the asset or its   use . For instance, a rise of the sea  level for   real estate   assets located near   riverbeds   or coastal areas. Acute risks relate to extreme events that  concern a wide range of hazards which can have potentially high adverse impacts from   limiting its use   (i.e.,  the effect of a   flooding resulting in a   commercial   centre   unable to   operate ) to very significant damage,  temporary or permanent, with high remediation costs (i.e., a building , a commercial   centre ,   or   a   plant  affected by earthquakes, cyclones, storms, or tsunamis). The quantitative assessment of an asset or a  portfolio of assets results in a table with a physical risk   exposure . Table   9   illustrates a real case of a n asset  located in   Italy .

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  15  Table   9   –   PR exposure  Qualitative analysis.   Once the different physical risk factors have been   assessed , the analyst will use the  table as an alert tool and select the highest risks and will discuss them with the   REICs   (if it is a solicited  rating) . Apart from the information gathered from this interchange, the analyst will rely   on the valuation  report s . Additionally, the analyst will   analyse   the insurance policy that covers   the real estate assets ,  keeping in mind that there is a high likelihood that the time horizon of the insurance coverage will us ually  be shorter than the remaining life of the asset and there are no guarantees that the current coverage will  be renewed on the same terms .  For instance, the qualitative analysis can take into account the geographic surroundings of a   real estate  asset that has a high - risk   exposure   in terms of flooding or wildfire risks. Continuing with this example, an  asset located in a region with a high wildfire hazard but within a precise location where there are no trees  or other flammable materials will have its wildfire hazard assessed as neg ligible compared to an asset  located in a forest. In this example, the rating analyst will interact with   REICs   (if   it is a solicited rating) , in  order to analyse possible remedial actions, put in place to reduce the risk (i.e. anti - fire area, water storage  and capabilities for quick fire extinction after an early detection by fire sensors).  Rating a portfolio of assets. In   the typical   case where a   REIC   holds a portfolio of several assets, the rating  analyst will assess the   diversification and the   materiality of those assets that have a significant physical risk  exposure . Physical Risk   Assessment  Riverline floods   Very low  Coastal floods   Very low  Tsunami   Very low  Main seal level rise   Very low  Heatwave   High  Coldwave   Low  Water stress   High  Aridity   Very low  Drought   Low  Wildfire   High  Earthquake   High  Extreme rainfall   Very low  Extreme snowfall   Very low  Storms   High  Tropical cyclone   Very low

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  16  Physical risk adjustment on   quality of the real estate assets : As a result of combining physical risks with the  level of protection afforded by the insurance policy and other possible mitigants, EthiFinance   Ratings   will  adjust the score of this factor down by one notch ,   and in some cases may consider further downward  adjustments provided that the risk can be determined to be material.  2.1.2   Scale and diversification  2.1.2.1   Asset Diversification  Diversification is important because   it can   mitigate the negative impact of   RE downturns as   certain   asset  classes may   remain relatively unaffected by   a crisis . In addition ,   specific   regions   or   countries   may   stay  immune to   a   targeted   crisis.   Finally, tenant diversification can also help mitigate the potential impacts  stemming from macro - economic   cycles .   The following sub factors are applicable   to   assess   diversification :  •   Asset   cl ass   d iversification   and   asset   concentration  •   Geographic   d iversification  •   Tenant   concentration  Table   10   –   Asset   class   diversification   and   asset   concentration  1 - 2   3   4   5   6   7  Several asset  class es   with a  broadly   e qual  weight   in  term s   of value  or   rental  income.   No  individual  asset  represents  more than 5%  of the   portfolio  value.  Several asset  class es .   No  individual  asset  represents  more than   10 %  of the   portfolio  value.  One   asset class  and the largest  asset  represents less  than   15 % of  the portfolio  value.  Only one asset  class ,   the  largest asset  represents  more than   15 %  of the   portfolio  value .  Only one asset  class ,   the  largest asset  represents  more than   30 %  of the   portfolio  value .  Only one asset  class ,   the  largest asset  represents  more than   50%  of the   portfolio  value .  The   asset attractiveness   assessment   made in the section 2.1.1 is   key   and allows to better appreciate the  asset diversification in term s   of geography and tenant.   The lower the asset attractiveness the more  important the geographic   diversification   and tenant   concentration .   Tables   10 and 11 below indicate the  notching   to apply, for geographic   diversification   and tenant   concentration , to the initial assessment  deriving   from t able 10.

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  17  Table   1 1   –   Geographic diversification & asset attractiveness  Asset attractiveness category  1, 2, 3   4, 5   6, 7  Geographic  diversification   Well diversified   +1   +1   =  Mildly  diversified   +1   =   - 1  Poorly  diversified   =   - 1   - 1  The geographical d iversification is defined as follows: i)   well diversified:   assets   present in several countries ,  ii) poorly diversified:   assets present in only one   economic   local region (i.e.   Paris area) ,   iii) mildly diversified  is in between.  Table   1 2   –   Tenant   con centration   & asset attractiveness  Asset attractiveness category  1, 2, 3   4, 5   6, 7  Tenant   concentration   Low  concentration   +1   +1   =  Medium  concentration   +1   =   - 1  High  concentration   =   - 1   - 1  The tenant   concentration   is   defined as   follows:   i)   low concentration :   no tenant   represents more than   5 % of  rental income , ii)   high concentration : the main tenant   represents more than   2 5 % of rental income , and iii)  medium   concentration   is   in   between.  In the specific case of   a tenant representing more than 50% of rental income and an asset attractiveness  category of 5, 6 or 7, then the   anchor rating   may   be   cap ped   at the level   of the   main tenant ’s rating .

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  18  2.1.2.2   Scale  A   RE I C’s   size , in terms of the gross asset value   of its portfolio,   reflects its position relative to sector peers,  and while being large is not a guarantee of future success, it is generally evidence of past achievements.  The GAV (Gross Asset Value) , which is defined in section 4.1 , is   the indicator to assess the scale.   In Table   1 3  we define how we assess scale for RE I Cs.   A   REIC   that is large in scale   in terms of the gross asset value of its  property portfolio   usually commands a dominant positioning   with significant market shares   (amongst the  top 5)   in   prime locations .   This positioning   implies a capacity to   defend   its pricing conditions   vis à vis   its  potential   tenants   based on the scarcity of prime locations . Large   RE I Cs   are able to spread fixed costs over  their   numerous operating units. Additionally, scale usually leads to geographic and   asset class  diversification.  Table   1 3   Gross Asset Value (GAV) (€bn)  Categories   1   2   3   4   5   6   7  Scale   GAV   >  20  20 ≥GAV>10   10 ≥GAV>5   5 ≥GAV> 1. 5   1.5 ≥GAV>0.75   0.75 ≥GAV>0.5   GAV≤0.5  2. 1. 3   Governance  Governance is   an important factor   that is   assessed through   the financial policy/management quality and  shareholding and control structure of the issuer.   For guidance on how to assess Governance please refer to  section 3.2.1. 3   of our Gener al   Corporate Methodology .

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  19  2. 2   FINANCIAL RISK PROFILE  The financial risk profile provides an assessment of a firm’s debt servicing capacity and solvency based on  four key credit metrics :  ▪   Leverage: N et debt/ EBITDA  ▪   Interest Coverage :   EBITDA / interest   exp enses  ▪   Solvency :   Debt   / Gross Asset Value   (GAV)  ▪   Asset availability :   Unencumbered Assets   (UA)   / GA V  T ypically, we use the last two years of financial data (audited   financial accounts) and three years (including  the current year) of financial projections (provided by the issuer or alternatively estimated by EthiFinance  Ratings ) to derive these credit metrics. If EthiFinance   Ratings   believes this approach is not representative  (M&A, restructuring, demerger, etc.), we would consider a time horizon which provides the clearest picture  of the company’s future economic reality. Where required, EthiFinance   Ratings   adjusts debt and EBITDA to  best reflect a company’s recurring   cash flows and enhance comparability across sectors and jurisdictions.  The main   adjustments are defined in Section   3.2 .2 of our   Gener al   Corporate   Rating   Methodology .  2. 2 .1   Cash flow (leverage and coverage)  To assess a firm’s cashflow and leverage ,   EthiFinance   Ratings   uses   two   credit ratios: EBITDA / Interest   and  NFD / EBITDA, which are given weights of 15% and   10 % respectively.   Both ratios   provide an intuitive view  of a company’s distance to default: the higher the cash flow relative to debt and / or interest expense s , the  higher the distance to a potential default. All things equal, we believe that companies with a more stable  and predictable cash flow profile can afford a higher debt leverage than companies with uncertain and / or  highly cyclical cash flows.  As mentioned before, RE I Cs   typically display stable cash flows   generated   from their rental income   that are  supported by pluriannual   contracts with their tenants.  Table   1 4   -   Leverage   ratio  1   2   3   4   5   6   7  NFD/EBITDA  ( X )   X   ≤ 1.0   1.0 <   X   ≤ 2.5   2.5< X   ≤ 4   4 <X   ≤ 6   6< X   ≤ 8   8 < X   ≤ 12   X   > 12  Table   1 5   –   Interest coverage ratio  1   2   3   4   5   6   7

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  20  EBITDA/interest  (Y)   Y   ≥ 10   10   > Y ≥   8   8> Y   ≥ 6   6> Y   ≥3   3> Y   ≥ 1.8   1.8> Y   ≥ 1.3   Y   < 1.3  2. 2 .2   Capitali s ation  To assess   the   c apitali s ation   of   a RE I C , EthiFinance   Ratings   uses the   Gross   Debt   /   ( GAV   + cash )   ratio. The  higher the   total of   GAV   plus   cash , the better the cushion is for creditors against future losses.  Table   1 6   -   Capitali s ation  1   2   3   4   5   6   7  Debt/GAV   (Z)   Z   ≤ 10%   10< Z   ≤ 20%   20< Z   ≤ 30%   30< Z   ≤ 50%   50< Z   ≤ 65%   65< Z   ≤ 75%   Z   > 75%  When a REIC has a significant amount of cash   representing more than 10% of the gross debt reflecting an  exceptional situation   (i.e. a large asset was sold with the intend to repay debt ) , then the net debt figure can  be retained for the calculation of the capitalisation   ratio (i.e. cash is removed from gross debt and not  added to the real estate value).  2. 2 .3   Asset availability  A company that   enjoys   asset availability   can   typically   access new sources   of financing with relative ease .  We assess   asset   availability   for   RE I Cs using the   following ratio:   Unencumbered Assets / GAV.   Th e   higher  the   ratio , the   easier   it   is for a   c ompany to   access new sources of   funds   either by   pledging their  unencumbered assets   against   new loans or by directly   selling them .  Table   1 7   –   Asset   availability  1   2   3   4   5   6   7  Une n cumbered  assets/GAV   (U)   U   ≥ 95%   95> U   ≥  90%  90 > U   ≥  80%  80 > U   ≥  65%   65 > U   ≥ 50%   50 > U   ≥ 35%   U   < 35%  2. 3   R ATING MODIFIERS  Once we have arrived at the Anchor Rating, we analyse three risk factors that are not   captured in the  scorecard ,   Liquidity risk ,   Country risk , and   ESG - related   controversies risk ,   in order to determine if it must be  adjusted down wards .   These modifiers are assessed following   Section   3.3   of our Gener al   Corporate   Rating  Methodology   with   a slight modification for the liquidity risk as presented after.

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  21  2. 3 .1   L iquidity  As mentioned,   EthiFinance   Ratings   follows   Section   3.3   of   our General Corporate   Rating   Methodology in  order to analyse a RE I C’s liquidity.   However, certain adjustments are made when calculating the sources of  funds   in order to better capture the specifi ci ties of a RE I C.  Because RE I Cs hold and operate long - lived   assets   that generate stable cash flows,   their capital structure  include s   a   sizable   proportion   of   long - term mortgage   loans   or bonds .   Typical l y ,   this debt   is   either   bullet or  with   a   sizable balloon   which are   usually   refinanced   at maturity.   Ther e for e, when calculating the liquidity for  the   up coming year , EthiFinance   Ratings   will   in most circumstances assume that   any bullet or ba l loon  amortisations will be   re financed.   T o apply this criterion,   all of   the following   conditions   must be met:  ▪   The RE I C has   a n   FRP of at least BB -  ▪   The RE I C must have   an   Unencumbered   Assets   / GAV ratio of 40%   at least  ▪   The RE I C must have   sufficient   unencumbered assets   in   the centre of large cities   to cover at least  twice the amount of the maturing loan   at the national level  If the RE market is undergoing a significant crisis,   i.e.   a 20% fall in   market   prices of the corresponding asset  class ,   then the above criteria will only be applied to RE I Cs with a n anchor   ra ting that is   i nvestment   g rade.  2.3.2 Country Risk  Th is   modifier   is   assessed following Section   3.3   of our Gener al   Corporate   Rating   Methodology  2.3.3   ESG - related   controversies  Th is   modifier   is   assessed following Section   3.3   of our Gener al   Corporate   Rating   Methodology

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  22  3.   RATING FRAMEWORK FOR REAL ESTATE   TRANSACTIONS  This   section   provides an overview of the approach taken by EthiFinance Ratings when assigning long - term  ratings to real estate transactions   (RET s ) .   It   i ncorporates a scorecard with details on the analytical factors  and the weights given to them.  This   framework   indeed   applies to self - financing special - purpose vehicles (SPVs) or holding companies with  activity limited to ownership of an SPV whose debt is serviced via the rental income generated by the  underlying real estate asset or via the disposal of the asset, or a mi x of both. These specialized real estate  financings are typically secured by the real estate asset and the vehicle is insulated from third - party  influence. This   framework   can apply to various real estate assets, from large residential   projects to  commercial centres, offices, warehouses, and tailor - made assets. In the event the asset is under  construction, a specific scorecard, reflecting the construction risk, also applies and is disclosed within this  methodology .   I n this specific case, EthiFinance Ratings will use the   more   conservative of the scorecard for  the operating asset and the scorecard for the asset under construction. This   framework   does not apply to  real estate developers, construction, or real estate   investment   companies   (co vered unders section 2 of this  methodology) .  To evaluate the credit quality of   RETs , EthiFinance Ratings assesses   t he asset attractiveness and the degree  of financial risk. The assessment of the asset attractiveness focuses on its capacity to attract tenants, its  resilience to adverse market conditions, and its environmental profile. The evaluation of financial risk  pr imarily focuses on the level of indebtedness through the loan - to - value (LTV) ratio and through the  coverage ratio, either via an interest coverage ratio (ICR) or via a debt service cover age ratio (DSCR).  Additional   modifiers   such as political & country risk, adverse ESG performance, sponsor reputation, hedging  risk, structuration risk, etc. These additional   modifiers   are mostly external factors which EthiFinance Ratings  believes are not reflected into the rating grid and impact the final rating through an override adjustment.  The main modifiers are explained in section 3.4 .   This   framework   also addresses the   issuer rating of the SPV  as the first step towards the rating of the instrument which   can entail two situations:  •   In the event of a single class of debt ,   the instrument rating matches the rating of the issuer.  •   In the event of different layer s   of debt ,   section 5 of the G ener al   Corporate Methodology   covers  instrument ratings .

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  23  Table 1 8   –   EthiFinance Ratings Methodology for RE T s   (operation al   phase)  Table   1 8   shows how EthiFinance   Rating   arrives at the Anchor Rating. First, each of the Business and  Financial risk profiles is assessed separately based on their respective risk subfactors. The Quality of   Assets  fa ctor may be negatively   impacted   by Physical Risks considerations. The resulting Business and Financial  profile scores are then weighed to arrive at the Anchor rating.  The   RE T ’s   asset risk   profile   is assessed using the following analytic al   factors:  •   Asset risk profile  The   RE T ’s financial risk profile   is assessed using the following analytic al   factors:  •   Loan - to - value or loan - to - construction  •   ICR ratio or DSCR  The construction risk acts as a rating cap for assets under construction. ANCHOR RATING  MODIFIERS   ISSUER RATING  ARP   FRP  Asset risk  profile   Loan to value  or loan to  construction  ICR Ratio or  DSCR  Physical  risks  modifier  Liquidity  Insurance policy  Country risk  CONSTRUCTION   RISK

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  24  Table   1 9   –   EthiFinance Ratings’   RETs   Anchor Rating  For   both profiles, a   score   between [1 and 8[ is   assigned   to each of the subfactors ,   where 1 is the best and  7.9 is the worst. They are then combined based on the weights presented in Table   1 9.  To arrive at the Anchor rating, EthiFinance   Ratings   translates the combined score of the Business and  Financial risk profiles into a rating based on the mapping presented in Table 3   -   Alphanumeric mapping for  the Anchor rating ,   and the   explanations below the table.  3.1   ASSET RISK PROFILE  3. 1 .1   Assessing the asset risk profile  The assessment of the asset quality is a core component of a   RET   and   its related   rating because it  determines the quality of the cashflows, and   by extension   the asset value. Because of the legal structure,  the asset is the unique source of revenues.  Due to that specific characteristic, t he assessment of   the asset risk profile is based on the same criteria as  for the RE I C s , however   with different   weights   a s   EthiFinance Ratings believes that the   creditworthiness of  the transaction   depends even more on the quality of the portfolio   compared to a RE I C .  In addition,   the   need of maintenance of the real estate asset and its complexity is assessed   in regard of the  counterparty in charge of the maintenance.   If there is a significant complexity in the maintenance   and a risk  of   default of   the counterparty in charge , then   a notching down of up to one notch can apply on the asset  risk profile.  3.1.1.1   Asset attractiveness  Please refer to the section 2.1.1.1 that covers   this criterion .  Asset   Risk Profile   6 0%  Asset   attractiveness   20 %  Weighted Avg. Unexpired Lease Term (WAULT)   10%  Tenants’ creditworthiness   10 %  Vacancy Levels   10 %  Energy Efficiency   10 %  Financial Risk Profile   4 0%  Loan - to - value or loan - to - construction   33 %  ICR   Ratio or DSCR   7 %

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  25  3.1.1.2   Weighted average unexpired lease term s  Please refer to the section 2.1.1. 2   that covers this criterion .  3.1.1.3   Tenants’ creditworthiness.  Please refer to the section 2.1.1.3 that covers this criterion.  3.1.1.4   Vacancy  Please refer to the section 2.1.1. 4   that covers this criterion.  3.1.1.5   Energy performance profile  Please refer to the section 2.1.1.5 that covers this criterion .  3.1.1.6   Physical Risks  Please refer to the section 2.1.1.6 that explains this criteri on .  Physical risk adjustment on asset risk profile: As a result of combining physical risks with the level of  protection afforded by the insurance policy and other possible mitigants, EthiFinance   Ratings   will adjust the  score of this factor down by one notch and in some cases may consider further downward adjustments  provided that the risk can be determined to be material.  3.2   FINANCIAL RISK PROFILE  3. 2 .1   Assessing the   financial   risk profile  3. 2 .1 .1   Loan To value  The loan - to - value (LTV) ratio measures the   total   debt to the value of the asset. The LTV is an essential ratio  for a real estate financing transaction & its documentation, through the setting of a maximum covenant  level. All else being equal, the lower the ratio, the lower the credit risk. Indeed, a low er ratio will provide  the lenders with a higher equity cushion which can better absorb operating losses and/or decrease in value,  especially in the event of adverse market conditions. This equity cushion may protect lenders in the event  of disposal of the   assets or make refinancing easier.  Table   20   -   LTV  1   2   3   4   5   6   7

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  26  Loan - to - value  or  L oan - to -  construction  LTV <  40%  40% ≤ LTV <  50%  50% ≤ LTV <  60%  60% ≤ LTV <  70%  70% ≤ LTV <  80%  80% ≤ LTV <  90%   LTV ≥ 90%  The value of the asset is   derived from market valuation from external third parties   to which the value of the  cash is added . According to the reputation of the third parties, and their credibility to assess such assets, a  discount may be applied.  3. 2 .1.2   Interest Coverage   Ratio and Debt Service Coverage Ratio  This interest coverage (ICR) ratio assesses the capacity of the SPV to cover its interest charges with the  cash - flow it   generates . The ICR ratio (net operating income - to - gross interest expenses) measures the  degree of financial strength or weakness and is an indicator of how close   an entity is   to missing an interest  payment and so to default. The ICR ratio is computed as net operating income over interest charges.  Table   2 1   –   ICR or DSCR  1   2   3   4   5   6   7  ICR Ratio or  DSCR  ICR >  10,0x  or  DSCR >  1,75x  10,0x ≥ ICR >  6,5x  or  1,75x ≥ DSCR  > 1,40x  6,5x ≥ ICR >  4,5x  or  1,40x ≥  DSCR >  1,25x  4,5x ≥ ICR >  2 , 5 x  or  1,25x ≥  DSCR >  1,175x  2 , 5 x ≥ ICR >  1 , 8 x  or  1,175x ≥ DSCR >  1,10x  1 , 8 x ≥ ICR >  1, 2 x  or  1,10x ≥ DSCR >  1,05x  ICR ≤   1, 2 x  or  DSCR ≤  1,05x  EthiFinance Ratings also calculates for amortizing facilities a debt service coverage ratio (DSCR) which is  computed as cash - flow over interest charges and principal repayment. In such cases, the cash - flow is  defined as net operating income minus working c apital minus capex minus specific cash - flow. EthiFinance  Ratings only computes maintenance capex as extraordinary capex would likely need to be financed with  several years of cash - flow and/or additional debt or equity. The specific cash - flow relates to ext raordinary  cash outflow/inflow adjustments estimated by EthiFinance Ratings on a case - by - case basis and considered  as necessary adjustments to reflect a normative cash - flow.  Both the ICR and DSCR ratios are computed using the remaining life of the debt. EthiFinance Ratings will  retain the most conservative between ICR scoring and DSCR scoring, even though obviously their scaling is  different, as highlighted within the EthiFina nce Ratings’ scorecard.  3. 2 .1.3   Financial risk profile assessment clarification  In the assessment of the financial risk profile, the ratio computed by EthiFinance Ratings will be based on  its own forecast s   and correspond to the next   3 years   of   forecast   ratios.   Regarding the   value   of the assets ,  for the LTV ratio ,   EthiFinance Ratings will not estimate prospective value and will use the current or most

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  27  recent value   (plus or minus investments or divestments) . In deed, in   the event of development capex, and if  such capex is not reflected in the initial LTV ratio, EthiFinance Ratings   will reflect   those   in the forecast s   for  the   ratio’s   calculation .  In the event there is a significant tenant concentration, EthiFinance Ratings may cap the financial  assessment scoring to the tenants’ assessed credit rating. This would particularly be the   case for specific  real estate assets for which the transaction could be considered as an off - balance sheet optimization for  the tenant. For instance, a project for which the asset will be used for industrial purposes, EthiFinance  Ratings will most likely c ap its financial assessment to the tenant credit rating. Under such a scenario, it is  most likely that an industrial site will have a low realizable value for a third party as it would   probably  require some significant capex and/or the site will attract on ly a very narrow prospect base.  3.3   ETHIFINANCE RATINGS’ SCORECARD WITH CONSTRUCTION RISK  The construction risk acts as a rating cap for assets under construction. In such a situation, EthiFinance  Ratings computes the scorecard based on its initial grid risk assessment and a further assessment based on  the below construction grid risk. During t he construction phase, EthiFinance Ratings retains the   more  conservative rating between its initial grid assessment and the construction grid risk assessment. Until the  asset has been delivered, the rating will be capped at a maximum level of   B BB.  Table 2 2   –   Scorecard with construction risk

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  28  Weight   Rating class   BBB   BB   B   CCC  15%  Constructors,  sponsors  & partners  Very strong & long  track record with  international  reputation  Sponsors and partners  with adequate track  record and brand  reputation  Sponsors or partners  with good but limited  track record  Sponsors or partners  with no track record or  weak track record  20%   Project  complexity  Long past record  regarding the  technology and/or  knowledge involved  to execute the  project  Adequate risk regarding  the technology and/or  knowledge involved to  execute the project  The project is built on  a cost - plus   structure  with a fixed delivery  date  The project is built on a  cost - plus structure with  unclear risk - sharing  and/or uncertain  delivery date  15%   Execution risk  Execution risk of  the project is very  low with typically  turnkey/EPC  contract  The project is either a  cost plus with rather  low execution risk or a  turnkey/EPC contract  with adequate  execution risk  The project presents  some complexity in  terms of execution  although the partners  have a good  execution track  record  The project presents  high complexity in  terms of execution and  the partners track -  record is limited in this  field  10%   Financing  Financing of the  project is fully  committed from  first - rank sponsors  or financial  institutions or with  available cash  Financing of the  project is partially  committed from first -  rank sponsors or  financial institutions  Financing of the  project is partially  committed from  second - rank sponsors  or financial  institutions  Financing of the project  with weak  commitments from  second - rank sponsors  or financial institutions  10%   Loan  administration  First - rank loan  administrator with  strong loan  administration  process (drawdown  tied to invoices with  independent  inspection before  drawdown, frequent  on - site visit from a  lenders'  representative)  First - rank loan  administrator with  adequate loan  administration process  Second - rank loan  administrator with  strong loan  administration  process  Weak loan  administrator or  second - rank loan  administrator with  adequate loan  administration process  10%   Insurance /  Bonds / Surety  Construction risk & insurance are   covered with  standard or robust bond/insurance scheme  from first - rank financial institutions  Construction risk &  insurance are covered  with a  bond/insurance  scheme from second  rank financial  institutions or from  first - rank institution s  with below - standard  bond/insurance  scheme  Construction risk &  insurance are covered  with below - standard  bond/insurance scheme  from relatively weak  financial institutions  10%  Project  completion  stage   -   PC  100% ≥ PC > 85%   85 ≥ PC > 66%   66 ≥ PC > 33%   PC ≤ 33%  10%   Pre - rent   risk   -  PR   100% ≥ P R   > 75%   75% > P R   > 50%   50% ≥ P R   > 25%   PR ≤ 25%  The construction phase is typically characterized by higher risk as it is exposed to cost overruns .   T here  might be some uncertainty regarding the ability of the constructor to deliver the project on time with all its

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  29  specificities, the construction might be exposed to technical construction challenges, or there can even be  unexpected problems with the land. Usually, the more standardized the asset, the more commoditized its  construction   can be , and by extension , the lesser the risk. Obviously, the experience of the constructors and  contractors are strong factors. The scorecard used by EthiFinance Ratings aims at assessing these risks,  although EthiFinance Ratings might decide to constrain the final rating in the   event t hat:  (i)   some criteria are assessed as very weak, for instance very high project complexity and very high  execution risk can potentially not be fully compensated for by very low commercialization risk  and very high experience of sponsors, constructors & partners.  (ii)   other external factors are expected to weigh significantly on the final rating assessment, in which  case the rationale of the override will be clearly detailed by EthiFinance Ratings.  When assessing the performing scorecard, EthiFinance Ratings will:  (i)   Assess the pre - rent   rate instead of the vacancy rate which is by definition not applicable. The  pre - rent   criterion is used up to   6   months after   delivery . In between 6 and 12 months after  delivery , the analyst will take the average of both scores (commercialization rate and vacancy).  If the rating assessment falls   12   month s   after   delivery , the analyst will only use the vacancy  criteria.  (ii)   Use the   more   conservative ratio between the loan - to - construction (LTC) ratio and the expected  loan - to - value ratio. LTC is computed using construction cost s .  3.4   RATING   MODIFIERS  Once we have arrived at the Anchor Rating, we analyse three risk factors that are not captured in the  scorecard: Liquidity risk ,   Country risk , and Insurance policy   in order to determine if it must be adjusted  downwards. The   first two modifier s are assessed following Section 3.3 of our General Corporate Rating  Methodology.  3. 4 .1   Liquidity  Th is   modifier   is   assessed following Section   3.3   of our Gener al   Corporate   Rating   Methodology .  In addition,   EthiFinance Ratings will expect a   RET   to operate with various bank accounts and a cashflow  waterfall. Such a structure allows better monitoring of the cashflow transaction and preserves a minimum  liquidity. In the event of significant deviation, the rating committee can consider additional ra ting  adjustments, especially in the event of weak financial performance.  3. 4 .2 Country risk  Th is   modifier   is   assessed following Section   3.3   of our Gener al   Corporate   Rating   Methodology .  3. 4 . 3   Insurance policy  Specific attention is paid to the insurance policy. EthiFinance Ratings expects a borrower to contract an  insurance policy in line with   market conditions and to cover the risks and specific risks which are

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  30  economically feasible to do. EthiFinance Ratings also pays attention to the assignment of insurance rights  as well as to the rating quality of the insurance company.

---

Corporate Rating Methodology   –   REI C s/RE T s   –   March   202 5  31  4   APPEND IX  4.1   RATIO DEFINITIONS  •   EBITDA: Operating income   –   depreciation and amortization   –   provisions   –   impairments and  profit/losses on disposal of non - current assets  •   N et   F inancial   D ebt :   ( s hort - term   financial   debt + long - t erm   financial   debt   –   cash & equivalents   –  short - term financial investments)  •   Debt/GAV:   Total Financial Debt /   Gross Asset Value  •   GAV:   By definition, it is the   f air value of a RE I C’s assets . If the fair value is not available, then  EthiFinance Ratings would use the   asset’s   Book Value ,   adding   back   the corresponding  accumulated depreciation  •   Unencumbered Assets:   Real Estate assets   that are not mortgaged