Developing and Evaluating an Automated Valuation Model for Residential Real Estate in Oslo  Kristoffer Birkeland Allan Daniel D'Silva  Industrial Economics and Technology Management Supervisor:   Are Oust, IØT Department of Industrial Economics and Technology Management Submission date: May 2018 Norwegian University of Science and Technology

---

P ROBLEM   D ESCRIPTION  The residential real estate market is an integral part of any nation’s economy. In Norway, a strong tradition of home-ownership exists, with as many as 84% of the population liv- ing in a self-owned home.   Furthermore, during the past few decades, the price of real estate in Norway’s capital Oslo has experienced strong growth. These factors have estab- lished a keen interest for the understanding of real estate prices among private individu- als, commercial actors and policymakers. Moreover, the housing market is characterised by substantial complexity, illiquidity and transaction costs, making it a far from frictionless market. In total, this motivates the research of residential real estate prices. In this study, we aim to develop an automated valuation model (AVM) to estimate the selling price of individual dwellings. Our approach is largely novel in the field of real es- tate finance and combines concepts from data science communities with techniques from traditional real estate research. Specifically, we leverage the concepts of   stacked generalisa- tion   and   comparable market analysis . Stacked generalisation, or stacking, is a machine learn- ing technique where a meta-estimator is trained to combine the predictions of underlying submodels. We implement five different submodels; four of these are ensemble learning methods, while the fifth model is based on a repeat sales index. We apply the concept of comparable market analysis by selecting a set of comparable previous transactions tailored for each value estimation. The AVM produces a value estimate for a dwelling by analysing data describing com- parable dwellings’ characteristics and previous transactions. To assess the model, we im- plement it for the residential real estate market in Oslo and evaluate its performance out- of-sample on all transactions in Oslo in the first quarter of 2018. i

---

P REFACE  This thesis concludes our Master of Science degree in Industrial Economics and Technology Management at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU). It is original and independent work performed by Kristoffer B. Birkeland and Allan D. D’Silva, written during the spring of 2018. We would like to thank our supervisor, Are Oust, Associate Professor at NTNU Business School, for his valuable advice and guidance. His interest in our work has been beneficial and motivating during the process of writing this thesis. Moreover, this study is developed in close collaboration with industry experts.   We thank Henrik Langeland, CEO of Alva Technologies, for his invaluable input and his unrestricted availability for questions during this process. iii

---

A BSTRACT  In this thesis, we develop an automated valuation model (AVM) for the residential real es- tate market, and evaluate it by analysing its accuracy on all dwellings sold in the first quar- ter of 2018 in Oslo, Norway. We design the AVM to utilise data on dwellings’ transactions and characteristics by leveraging the concepts of stacked generalisation and comparable market analysis. In particular, we combine four novel ensemble learning methods with a repeat sales method and tailor the data selection for each value estimate. By developing our AVM, we aim to aid in creating a more efficient real estate market and to further the research of applying machine learning to real estate finance. We calibrate and evaluate the model for the residential real estate market in Oslo, by producing out-of-sample value estimates for the 1 979 dwellings sold in Q1 2018.   This yields highly promising results; the AVM achieves a median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) of 5.4%, and more than 96% of the dwellings are estimated within 20% of their actual selling price. This is comparable to the accuracy of local estate agents in Oslo, and we observe similar performances by the industry leader for AVMs in the U.S. These results demonstrate that our AVM is a viable tool for both industrial and private applications. Furthermore, we find our novel approach of applying stacked generalisation to residential real estate valuation to be successful and encourages the research into the application of machine learning to the field of real estate finance. v

---

S AMMENDRAG  I denne oppgaven utvikler vi en automatisert verdsettelsesmodell (AVM) for boligmarkedet, og evaluerer den ved å analysere presisjonen på alle boliger solgt i første kvartal 2018 i Oslo. Vi utformer AVMen slik at den utnytter data om boligers transaksjoner og egenskaper ved å benytte konseptene "stacked generalisation" og sammenlignbar markedsanalyse. Mod- ellen kombinerer fire "ensemble"-læringsmetoder med en "repeat sales"-metode og skred- dersyr dataseleksjonen for hvert estimat. Ved å utvikle vår AVM tar vi sikte på å bidra til å skape et mer effektivt eiendomsmarked, og å fremme forskningen innen anvendelse av maskinlæring i boligøkonometri. Vi kalibrerer og tester modellen for boligmarkedet i Oslo ved å produsere estimater for de 1 979 boligene som ble solgt i første kvartal 2018. Dette gir svært lovende resultater. AVMen oppnår en median absolutt prosentfeil på 5,4%, og mer enn 96% av boligene er es- timert innenfor 20% av den faktiske salgsprisen. Dette er sammenlignbart med presisjonen til eiendomsmeglere i Oslo, og vi observerer lignende resultater hos markedslederen for automatiserte verdsettelsesmodeller i USA, Zillow. Disse resultatene viser at vår automatiserte verdsettelsesmodell er et konkurransedyk- tig verktøy for både industrielle og private anvendelser. Videre finner vi vår tilnærming ved å anvende "stacked generalisation" til verdsettelse av boliger å være lovende og anbe- faler videre forskning innenfor anvendelsen av maskinlæring til boligøkonometri. vii

---

C ONTENTS  1   Introduction   1 2   The Residential Real Estate Market in Oslo   3  2.1   Background   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 2.2   Ownership Types and Common Debt   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4 2.3   Market Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4  3   Data Analysis   5  3.1   The Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5 3.2   Data Pre-Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6 3.3   Exploratory Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7  4   Methodology   12  4.1   Methodology Overview   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 4.2   Attribute-Based Pricing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 4.3   Repeat Sales Method   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17 4.4   Comparable Pricing and Stacking of Models   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 4.5   Out-of-Sample Prediction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20  5   Results and Discussion   21  5.1   Evaluation of the Performance of our AVM   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21 5.2   Evaluation of the Stacked Model   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 5.3   Evaluation of the Attribute-Based Pricing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24 5.4   Evaluation of the Repeat Sales Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26 5.5   Model Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27  6   Conclusion   28  6.1   Motivation, Findings and Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28 6.2   Further Research   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28  A   Appendix   30  A.1   An Evaluation of Artificial Neural Networks as AVMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 A.2   Decision Trees for the XGBoost-Method   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32 A.3   Methodological and Implementation Details of the Repeat Sales Method . . .   33 A.4   Plots of the Real Estate Indices by the Repeat Sales Method . . . . . . . . . . .   35 A.5   Number of Transactions Per District and Quarter in Oslo   . . . . . . . . . . . .   36 A.6   Implementation Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37 A.7   Stacked Generalisation - Python Code for Procedure 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38  References   39  ix

---

L IST OF   F IGURES  Figure 1   Map of Oslo, including district borders.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 Figure 2   Histogram of all recorded transactions in the dataset (1993-2018)   . . .   5 Figure 3   Missing values for explanatory variables   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6 Figure 4   Correlation plot of interdependencies   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8 Figure 5   All recorded transactions in Oslo 2016-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 Figure 6   Summary of the automated valuation model   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 Figure 7   Example of a decision tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14 Figure 8   Correlations of submodels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23 Figure 9   Model performance of the AVM for various number of comparables   .   24 Figure 10   Attribute importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25 Figure 11   Decision trees for the XGBoost-method   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32 Figure 12   Real Estate Price Indices for Oslo 1993-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35  L IST OF   T ABLES  Table 1   Overview of exogenous variables   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6 Table 2   Descriptive statistics on PPSM in different districts   . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 Table 3   Descriptive statistics on cooperatives and condominiums   . . . . . . . .   10 Table 4   Descriptive statistics on unit type   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10 Table 5   Bagging hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15 Table 6   XGBoost hyperparameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16 Table 7   Our AVMs aggregate results for Q1 2018   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21 Table 8   Comparable prediction accuracy of estate agents   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21 Table 9   Comparable prediction accuracy of Zillow   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 Table 10   Submodel accuracy compared to the AVM   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23 Table 11   Prediction accuracy of AVM with and without RSM . . . . . . . . . . . .   26 Table 12   Quantiles and MdAPE of the predictions by an ANN . . . . . . . . . . .   31 Table 13   ANN hyperparameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31 Table 14   Count of transactions per quarter and district   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36 Table 15   Training times for the individual algorithms   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37 x

---

A CRONYMS  ANN   artificial neural network  AVM   automated valuation model  BP   bagging predictor  ET   extra trees  HPM   hedonic pricing method  MAE   mean absolute error  MAPE   mean absolute percentage error  MdAPE   median absolute percentage error  NOK   Norwegian krone  OLS   ordinary least squares  PPSM   price per square meter  RF   random forest  RSM   repeat sales method  USM   usable square meters  WLS   weighted least squares  XGB   XGBoost xi

---

1 I NTRODUCTION  The decision of purchasing or selling a dwelling is typically the most significant financial decision in a person’s life (Smith & Tan, 2015). It is both a financial investment, as it yields potential capital gains or losses, and a consumption decision, as it influences life quality. Furthermore, the residential real estate market is a vital part of a nation’s economy, affecting banks, policymakers and investors, in addition to homeowners. It is a market characterised by significant transaction costs, low liquidity and high information asymmetry between its professional actors and private individuals (Ibbotson & Siegel, 1984; Levin, 2001). Also, the residential real estate market has hardly been impacted by digitalisation and automation, compared to other markets (Sittler, 2017). A neutral automated value estimator can benefit several actors in the residential real estate market. First, a publicly available service that provides such estimates can benefit private individuals, both home buyers and sellers. When applying for a loan, searching for a new place to live or when considering to sell a residence, these estimates can simplify the process. Second, we believe that automated value estimates also can be of great importance to professional actors like banks, asset managers or policymakers. Situations where auto- mated value estimates could be beneficial are when diversifying loans, considering new asset placements or calculating discount rates. 1  This paper aims to develop an automated valuation model (AVM), which is an auto- mated tool that produces real estate property valuations based on statistical modelling. By doing so, we seek to create a more efficient real estate market. The AVM should be capable of leveraging both historical transaction data and attribute-specific data. We strive to de- velop a flexible AVM, that can be applied to any real estate market given sufficient source data, and implement and evaluate it in Oslo. This study may be placed in the intersection of i) the research surrounding AVMs, ii) the application of   ensemble learning   in the field of econometrics and iii) the research in the con- struction of real estate indices. In the two latter research areas, we find extensive literature from the past five decades. Ensemble learning methods by Breiman (1996a) and Schapire (1989) have been applied with success in relatively few, albeit increasing number of, econo- metric works (Graczyk, Lasota, Trawi ´ nski, & Trawi ´ nski, 2010; Inoue & Kilian, 2008). 2   The research into the construction of real estate indices has had few improvements since the work by Case and Shiller (1987), building on Bailey, Muth, and Nourse (1963). These in- dices are acclaimed by academia (Balk, De Haan, & Diewert, 2011) and implemented by industrial actors (S&P Dow Jones Indices, n.d.). We find the publicly available research regarding AVMs to be fragmented, and that a methodological consensus has yet to emerge.   Traditionally, methods based on ordinary least squares (OLS) have been the prominent approaches (Pattichis, 1999). More recently, geographically optimised regressions have been explored to better fit the dynamics of real estate (Moore & Myers, 2010). However, both these methods suffer from multicollinear- ity issues related to their parametric form (Wheeler, Tiefelsdorf, Wheeler, & Tiefelsdorf, 2005).   Today, much of the publicly available development of AVMs flourishes amongst machine learning communities like Kaggle 3 , where contemporary techniques such as ar- tificial neural networks and ensemble learning are the most popular (Adam-Bourdarios, Cowan, Germain, & Guyon, 2015; D. Nielsen, 2016).  1 Downie and Robson (2007) provides a global perspective on the use of AVMs across commercial and govern- ment applications.  2 We particularly recommend Mullainathan and Spiess (2017) as an excellent overview of machine learning applications in econometrics.  3 https://www.kaggle.com/zillow . Retrieved May 27 th   2018  1.   I NTRODUCTION   1

---

Our approach to developing an AVM is fairly novel in academic finance, and is largely inspired by innovations of data science communities (Kaggle, 2018) and leading interna- tional industrial actors (Zillow, 2017). First, it combines the well-established repeat sales method (RSM) by Case and Shiller (1987) with four machine learning methods by using a concept known as   stacked generalisation   (D. H. Wolpert, 1992). Second, our model includes a form of valuation known as   comparable market analysis   (Rattermann, 2007), which seeks to value dwellings based on transactions with a close spatial and temporal proximity. The four machine learning methods, which we combine with the RSM, are known as  ensemble learning methods . Ensemble learning is a class of modern machine learning meth- ods which combines multiple models into one model in order to increase its   out-of-sample  predictive force (Opitz & Maclin, 1999). The four submodels are from two classes of ensem- ble learning techniques;   bagging   (Breiman, 1996a) and   boosting   (Freund & Schapire, 1996; Schapire, 2013).   The use of these ensemble learning methods allows our model to learn patterns in the underlying data, without making any assumptions regarding the data. We hypothesise that these ensemble learning methods are suitable for use in the residential real estate market, due to the amount of available source data and the complexity of the modelling task. The AVM developed in this study shows several encouraging results. We evaluate our model by producing out-of-sample estimates for the 1 979 dwellings sold in Oslo in Q1 2018. Our AVM values these dwellings with a median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) of 5.4%, with more than 96% of the dwellings being estimated within 20% of their actual selling price. We compare the model to traditional AVMs, estate agents and the industry leader for commercial AVMs, Zillow. The performance of our AVM is comparable to the accuracy of estate agents, which has been at 5.3% in Oslo over the past two years, and superior to the precision of Zillow in several of the cities in which they provide official performance statistics. This thesis has two main implications.   First, by making our AVM publicly available through a web service, it can directly aid actors in the real estate market in Oslo. We aim to do this by continuing to work with our industrial partner, Alva Technologies. Second, the combination of modern ensemble learning techniques and traditional real estate indices has yielded promising results. We believe that further research within the combination of these fields will be beneficial for future AVMs. The remainder of this study is structured as follows: In Chapter 2, the residential real estate market in Oslo is presented, with an emphasis on concepts critical to our model. Next, in Chapter 3 we describe the datasets and data pre-processing steps used by our AVM. In Chapter 4, we develop and justify the technical aspects of our AVM. Chapter 5 presents the results of our model, and evaluates its performance.   Finally, in Chapter 6, we summarise the performance of our AVM and suggest future extensions and areas of research within this field. 1.   I NTRODUCTION   2

---

2  T HE   R ESIDENTIAL   R EAL   E STATE   M ARKET IN   O SLO  Real estate valuation models are known to be highly dependent on local conditions (Tsat- saronis & Zhu, 2004). Therefore, we use this chapter to introduce critical factors specific for real estate in Oslo. In particular, we seek to understand the factors affecting the selling prices in the residential real estate market in Oslo, with the aim of adapting our AVM to the city’s conditions. To do this we i) present fundamental background information on the residential real estate market in Oslo, ii) provide a brief description of the ownership types of residential real estate in Norway and iii) discuss some underlying market drivers that affect residential real estate prices. 2.1   B ACKGROUND  The residential real estate market in Norway is characterised by a strong tradition of home- ownership, with 84 percent of Norwegians live in a self-owned home, compared to 69 and 65 percent for Sweden and Denmark, respectively (Eurostat, 2015). By January 2018, the population of Oslo was 673,468 (Statistics Norway, 2018a). The city has experienced large growth over the past few decades, and metropolitan Oslo has contributed to roughly 50% of the population growth of Norway (Statistics Norway, 2010). The dwellings located in central parts of Oslo are typically characterised by four- and five-storey brick apartment buildings. Historically, western parts of Oslo have generally had larger, more expensive houses, while eastern parts have had smaller, less expensive apartments. Oslo is divided into 15 districts, in addition to the city centre, as illustrated in Figure 1.  Figure 1: Map of Oslo, including district borders.  Two official registers,   Matrikkelen   and   Grunnboken , define real estate property and owner- ship relations for the Norwegian real estate market (The Norwegian Mapping Authority, 2017). Every dwelling is described in   Matrikkelen . It contains information about the location and boundaries of the dwelling, its size, attached property and, in the case of apartments, the building in which it is contained.   Grunnboken   describes ownership relationships for 2.   T HE   R ESIDENTIAL   R EAL   E STATE   M ARKET IN   O SLO   3

---

both private property and cooperatives. In the Norwegian real estate market it is a common practice to define the selling price as the sum of the transaction amount the buyer pays and the common debt which the buyer incurs (Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation, 2009; Statistics Norway, 2017). We use this definition in our model. 2.2   O WNERSHIP   T YPES AND   C OMMON   D EBT  There are two main ownership types in Norway; condominiums and cooperatives. While condominiums are owned directly by individuals, cooperatives are owned by a legal entity, known as a   cooperative association . Individuals can buy and sell shares of this association to acquire and relinquish the right to use a dwelling. There are important tax-related distinc- tions between the two categories; purchasing a condominium results in a document tax of 2.5% of the selling price, while no such tax is levied when acquiring a dwelling in a co- operative association. Furthermore, the cooperative association is a separate legal entity, responsible for the debt incurred from construction or renovation, while every coopera- tive member is responsible for the common costs, which essentially maintains the common debt. Besides, there may be further regulations enforced by the cooperative, e.g. regulating subletting. The combined effect of all these restrictions on the sold price is thought to be minimal (Boligmani, 2015; E24, 2014). We analyse the differences between ownership types in our dataset in Chapter 3. Common debt is the debt that is owned by a cooperative or a group of condominiums and is incurred when purchasing a dwelling. The debt originates from the construction of dwellings in a cooperative, or renovation projects for both cooperatives or groups of con- dominiums. Apart from potential differences in interest rates and the handling of default scenarios, this debt is equivalent to any other debt obtained when purchasing a dwelling. 2.3   M ARKET   D YNAMICS  Developments in observed explanatory variables cannot fully explain the observed vari- ation in house prices.   There are underlying macroeconomic drivers, as well as market dynamics, that have significant short-term effects on residential real estate values (Adams & Füss, 2010). The level and expectations of interest rates, policy decisions and the GDP of Norway are important macroeconomic drivers, while the price of substitute goods (rent prices), population growth, amount of debt in the housing market and rate of construction are important market dynamics (Harris, 1989; Sufi & Mian, 2014). We do not analyse any of these variables, as we consider this to be outside of the scope of this paper. As explained in Chapter 4, we aim to use the repeat sales method (RSM) to capture the appreciation or depreciation in the market. 2.   T HE   R ESIDENTIAL   R EAL   E STATE   M ARKET IN   O SLO   4

---

3 D ATA   A NALYSIS  3.1   T HE   D ATASETS  Our primary datasets are consolidated from   Grunnboken   and   Matrikkelen , introduced in Chapter 2.1, by Alva Technologies. They have conducted a thorough data cleaning pro- cess and provided us with three datasets. These can be summarised as follows: i)   Address dataset:   Consists of all dwellings in Norway, where 276 780 of them are located in Oslo.   The dataset contains most of the descriptive variables displayed in Table 1. ii)   Enhanced transaction dataset:   Consists of 18 401 transactions from Oslo between August 2016 and April 2018. Proprietary dataset with improved quality and additional variables. iii)   Historical transaction dataset:   Consists of all registered residential real estate transactions in Oslo between January 1993 and May 2018, illus- trated in Figure 2. In total 220 898 separate transactions are mapped to Oslo-addresses. Includes   unique address identifier ,   sold price   and   sold date , but is missing data on   common debt   and   usable square meters (USM) .  Figure 2: All recorded transactions in the dataset (1993-2018) by year of transaction. Note that sales from cooperatives are added around 2007 causing a sharp increase in the number of transactions.  Table 1 illustrates the attributes that are gathered from these datasets and used by the en- semble learning methods in Chapter 4.2. The dwellings’ locations are described by both geographical coordinates and districts. The area within the walls of an individual dwelling is defined as its usable square meters (USM). Dwellings in Norway are typically divided into four main unit types;   apartments ,   row houses ,   semi-detached houses   and   houses . Apart- ments are defined as dwellings which occupy only part of a larger building, while the three other unit types denote variations of dwellings that are built separately. When modelling, we explicitly distinguish between apartments and non-apartments (i.e. row house, semi- detached house or house), due to differences discussed in Chapter 3.3. We do, however, use the unit type as a categorical variable in the ensemble learning methods. 3.   D ATA   A NALYSIS   5

---

Table 1: Overview of the exogenous variables used by the attribute-based pricing methods.  Variable   Type   Description USM   Numeric   The dwelling’s usable square meterss  Coordinates   Numeric   The geographical coordinates of a dwelling  Storey   Numeric   The floor on which the dwelling is located  # of rooms   Numeric   The number of rooms in the dwelling  # of days since sale   Numeric   Number of days since the occurrence of the transaction  Rank   Numeric   Measure of proximity to target dwelling, increasing with distance  Build year   Numeric   Construction year of the dwelling  Common debt   Numeric   The dwelling’s part of the debt held by the group of properties  Sold month   Categorical   The year and month of the occurrence of the transaction  District   Categorical   The district in which the dwelling is located  Unit type   Categorical   The unit type of the dwelling  Build type   Categorical   The type of the dwelling, as by NS3457 (2013)  Ownership type   Categorical   The dwelling’s ownership type, as by Chapter 2.2  Elevator   Categorical   Whether or not the building of the dwelling has an elevator  In addition to the datasets provided by Alva Technologies, we use a separate dataset to analyse estate agents’ aggregate precision and compare it with that of our model.   This dataset, gathered from Eiendomsverdi, contains 15 786 transactions in Oslo from 2016 and 2017 and includes both the   asking price , provided by the estate agent, and the final   sold price . 3.2   D ATA   P RE -P ROCESSING  As shown in Figure 3, there is a significant degree of missing data in our datasets, with certain attributes such as   number of rooms   and   storey   missing values in roughly 30 % of its records. Also, we have been advised by industry experts that the   historical transaction dataset  is prone to contain erroneous data. Specifically, this seems to be due to the occurrence of sales under special circumstances, poor data management, and poor data integration of data from multiple sources.  Figure 3: The number of missing values for each explanatory variable. The total number of transactions is 18 073.  The issues above motivate the development of a pre-processing procedure prior to devel- oping our AVM. To handle missing data we consider a selection of methods presented in Allison (2001), including   imputation   and   listwise deletion , and build on these concepts. To develop a cleaning procedure for the transaction data, we rely on advice from industry 3.   D ATA   A NALYSIS   6

---

experts and practices prevalent in academia. We perform a pre-processing procedure con- sisting of two steps; i) handling missing values and ii) additional cleaning for the historical transaction dataset. First, we handle dwellings with missing data, either by removing these dwellings (and associated transactions) from our dataset or by imputing substituted values. First, we re- move all dwellings where we do not have data regarding the   district , which in total affects less than 1 % of the dwellings. By doing so, we simultaneously remove all data points with missing values for   elevator ,   unit type ,   build type   and   coordinates . Next, we impute values for data points with missing values for   storey ,   build year   and   number of rooms , with the mean value of all remaining dwellings.   This technique is known as   mean substitution   and is a standard method for imputation (Hariharakrishnan, Mohanavalli, Srividya, & Sundhara Kumar, 2017). In total the imputation affects around 30 % of the transactions. Second, we further clean the   historical transaction dataset . The outline for this data cleaning step is given below in Procedure 1.  P ROCEDURE   1: Cleaning of historical transaction dataset  1) Remove transactions with a selling price below 100 kNOK or above 70 MNOK. This accounts for less than 1 % of the transactions. 2) Remove transactions where the same property is sold twice within three months.   This might be due to distressed sales or speculative transac- tions, and are therefore not likely to explain the real appreciation or de- preciation in that given period (Jansen, De Vries, Coolen, Lamain, & Boel- houwer, 2008). 3) Remove transactions where the ratio of the sold prices between two trans- actions is larger than five. This is an unlikely observation, and we expect it to be due to an error in the logging phase or large renovation projects. 4) Remove dwellings that have more than ten previous transactions within the recorded time period. This high frequency of re-selling is unlikely, and the dwellings will typically not be representative, as argued by Case and Shiller (1987). We note that our AVM is evaluated on a test set with transactions solely from the enhanced transaction dataset. Therefore removing transactions from the historic transaction dataset will not bias the selection of our test set and overstate our results. 3.3   E XPLORATORY   D ATA   A NALYSIS  In this section, we analyse the datasets to summarise and discuss their main characteristics, especially those concerning location, sold price, common debt and usable square meters, for the different unit types and ownership types. With this, we aim to be able to adapt our AVM to the datasets. We start by analysing the interdependencies between the different explanatory attributes by discussing the correlations of the numerical attributes. Next, a detailed illustration of the most recent sales in Oslo is used to highlight the local differences in sold price per square meter. Finally, we provide statistics on the dwellings with multiple previous sales and discuss changes over time for the historical transaction dataset. This lays a foundation for the development of our AVM, and multiple choices made in Chapter 4 are due to findings in this section.  On Multicollinearity and Omitted Variable Bias  When analysing the impact of a dwelling’s attributes on its selling price, one needs to be cautious of potentially skewed estimates due to interdependencies of the explanatory vari- ables (Walpole, Myers, Myers, & Ye, 2016).   As shown in Figure 4, there are clear linear 3.   D ATA   A NALYSIS   7

---

relationships between the attributes in our dataset. For instance, we observe a positive cor- relation between   build year   and   longitude , and also a negative correlation between   USM   and  storey . 4   These observations indicate that the dwellings located in western parts of Oslo are, on average, older and that dwellings on higher floors tend to be smaller in size. This inher- ent multicollinearity of explanatory variables in the residential real estate market has to be accounted for when developing an AVM, since many traditional real estate pricing meth- ods build on an assumption of independent attributes which can be priced individually (Wheeler et al., 2005). Another potential issue with the dataset is the sufficiency of the observed and recorded set of explanatory variables.   When price-affecting characteristics of a dwelling are ex- cluded, then the model may suffer from what is known as   omitted variables bias . This bias may carry over to the predicted prices and affect their accuracy. In practice, the bias is im- possible to avoid, as detailed information capturing structural characteristics, neighbour- hood quality, among others, can be hard to obtain.   Therefore, the effect of the   omitted variable bias   depends on the model specification.  Figure 4: A plot of Pearson correlation coefficients between the numerical variables in our datasets, illustrating linear dependencies between several of the variables. These dependencies present challenges when pricing real estate using linear regression models.  Location  As discussed in Chapter 2 the location of a dwelling is known to be a major driver of its selling price. Table 2 illustrates the variations in price per square meter in some of the dis- tricts in our dataset, and Figure 5 shows prices per square meter for all transactions in the enhanced transaction dataset. Both Table 2 and Figure 5a highlight the clear variations in prices between districts, which motivates the use of districts as an explanatory variable. However, we also observe large local differences within districts. Figure 5b shows this in Nordstrand, which is a district with both proximity to the coastal line and areas with large high-rise buildings.   This motivates the inclusion of the dwelling’s geographical coordi- nates as a finer grained location measure.  4 Both of which are significant with a p-value of   <   0.001.  3.   D ATA   A NALYSIS   8

---

Table 2: The 25 th , 50 th   (median) and 75 th   percentile of the price per square meter (PPSM), for a selection of the districts in Oslo, based on the enhanced transaction dataset. Alna   Østensjø   Nordstrand   Grünerløkka   Frogner 25 %   41 kNOK   49 kNOK   52 kNOK   65 kNOK   76 kNOK Median   47 kNOK   54 kNOK   57 kNOK   72 kNOK   85 kNOK 75 %.   55 kNOK   60 kNOK   64 kNOK   81 kNOK   96 kNOK  (a) All recorded transactions in Oslo (2016-2018), in total 18 073 transactions.  (b) All recorded transactions in the district Nordstrand (2016-2018), in total 1 167 transactions.  Figure 5: All recorded transactions in Oslo (2016-2018). A darker colour represents a higher price per square meter (PPSM). The bolded black lines represent the district borders, while the red line is the coastline. We observe large local differences, highlighted by the the plot of Nordstrand.  Common debt  In Chapter 2 we introduced some of the main practical and jurisdictional differences be- tween the two ownership types. In Table 3 we present basic descriptive statistics for the 3.   D ATA   A NALYSIS   9

---

ownership types, based on the transactions in the enhanced transaction dataset. It indi- cates major differences in the amount of common debt for the two ownership types. There are also noticeable differences in the   sold price , but these variations might also be due to factors other than the ownership types; there are observed differences in location, build year etc. While the median-sized dwellings in the two ownership types are almost identi- cal in size, the median amount of   common debt   for condominiums is less than 3 % of that of cooperatives. The low level of common debt for condominiums implies that the historical transaction dataset can be used, even though it lacks data regarding common debt.  Table 3: Descriptive statistics on the   usable square meters (USM) ,   sold price   and   common debt   for cooperatives and condominiums, based on the enhanced transaction dataset, illustrating differences in common debt.  Cooperative   Condominum  USM   Sold Price   Common Debt   USM   Sold Price   Common Debt Mean   58   3.7 MNOK   230 kNOK   67   5.1 MNOK   41 kNOK St.Dev.   18   1.0 MNOK   318 kNOK   27   2.0 MNOK   72 kNOK 25%   46   3.0 MNOK   76 kNOK   49   3.6 MNOK   0 NOK 50%   59   3.4 MNOK   141 kNOK   60   4.5 MNOK   4 kNOK 75%   69   4.0 MNOK   228 kNOK   82   6.1 MNOK   58 kNOK  Repeat sales  We have registered transactions on 185 961 of the dwellings in our dataset, and 100 268 of these are sold at least twice. We define two consecutive transactions of a dwelling as a  repeat sale . Figure 2 illustrates the number of dwellings sold each year, and Appendix A.5 displays the number of recorded transactions per month for each district. We note that we do not have data on the sales of   cooperatives   from 1993 to 2004, and in the period 2005-2006, only a minority of cooperative sales are registered. Hence, we observe a spike in Figure 2 in 2007, when sales from cooperatives are added. Also, we observe an increasing number of transactions each year. During the last ten years, we observe a doubling in the number of transactions in Oslo. This sparsity of transactions before 2007 should be considered when modelling the development in historical prices. At the same time, the large total number of repeat sales motivates the use of previous sales when valuing dwellings.  Unit types  The dwellings from the four unit types (apartment, house, semi-detached house and row house) differ in both size and sold price. Table 4 illustrates this for all recorded transactions from 2016 until 2018. An important aspect here is that roughly 90 % of the transactions are from apartments, while only 10 % of the transactions are from non-apartments.  Table 4: Descriptive statistics on   usable square meters (USM)   and   sold price , based the enhanced transaction dataset, illustrating differences and similarities between unit types  Apartment   Row house   Semi-detached house   House  USM   Sold Price   USM   Sold Price   USM   Sold Price   USM   Sold Price Mean   63   4.2 MNOK   137   6.3 MNOK   137   8.5 MNOK   192   11.6 MNOK St.Dev.   24   1.9 MNOK   45   2.9 MNOK   45   2.9 MNOK   58   4.0 MNOK 25%   48   3.0 MNOK   105   4.3 MNOK   105   6.2 MNOK   156   9.0 MNOK 50%   62   3.6 MNOK   135   5.7 MNOK   135   8.5 MNOK   187   11.2 MNOK 75%   73   4.8 MNOK   128   7.9 MNOK   165   10.4 MNOK   222   13.6 MNOK  Table 4 demonstrates that apartments are much smaller than the other three categories in size. The 75 th   percentile usable square meters for apartments is smaller than the 25 th  percentile for row houses. Semi-detached houses are more expensive than row houses, and 3.   D ATA   A NALYSIS   10

---

dwellings tagged as houses are by far the largest and most expensive. The median-sized house is more than three times that of the median-sized apartment. We observe smaller differences between the categories in   sold price   than in   USM , indicating that there might be a decreasing marginal sold price for increasing dwelling size. The large share of transactions involving apartments, as well as the apparent similarity of the non-apartment unit types, suggest a different modelling approach for apartments and non-apartments.  Sold date  The dynamics of the housing market discussed in Chapter 2.3 often causes large short-term fluctuations in real estate prices. The precise date of a transaction is therefore critical when modelling these prices. From here on we denote   sold date   as the date when the buyer and seller agree upon a selling price, and   official date   as the date when the dwelling is handed over to the buyer.   The official date is registered in the official registers ("Grunnboken"), and can be several months after the sold date. In our data, we find the average difference between official date and sold date to be 46 days. We argue that the sold date is the most interesting when modelling house prices, as it indicates the time at which the sold price was determined. All the transactions in the enhanced transaction dataset have a recorded sold date. However, for the historical transaction dataset we only have sold date on some transactions. Therefore, we use the official date as a proxy for the sold date for these trans- actions. 3.   D ATA   A NALYSIS   11

---

4 M ETHODOLOGY  4.1   M ETHODOLOGY   O VERVIEW  In this chapter, we develop our automated valuation model (AVM). First, we introduce two key concepts of our AVM, namely   stacked generalisation   and   comparable market analysis . Next, we describe the most prominent value estimation technique for AVMs, namely attribute- based pricing methods. In particular, we present four recently developed machine learn- ing methods that aim to circumvent some of the shortcomings of traditional parametric attribute-based pricing methods. Further, we describe the repeat sales method, a widely used method for creating   real-estate indices , and how we apply it to real estate valuation. Finally, we present our AVM, which combines the aforementioned concepts. Although we aim to predict the selling price, we model the price per square meter (PPSM), as this is a common measure and recommended in academia (Bonnet, 2012; Ket- tunen, 2012) and industry (Statistics Norway, 2018b).  Stacked Generalisation  When producing a value estimate for a dwelling, our AVM uses multiple underlying meth- ods, known as   submodels , to create individual value estimates for every dwelling in the training data.   A separate model, known as a   model-stacker , then analyses the individual value estimates   in-sample , to determine the   out-of-sample   prediction for the dwelling. This technique is referred to as stacked generalisation 5 , and was pioneered by D. H. Wolpert (1992) and refined by Breiman (1996b). Their idea was that the model-stacker should use the training data and the individual predictions to identify the biases made by the un- derlying algorithms, thus reducing the bias when predicting out-of-sample. The stacking procedure is outlined in Figure 6, and will also be detailed in Chapter 4.4.  Figure 6: Summary of the automated valuation model (AVM). The model is trained for each individual value estimate it produces. The model extracts the   n 6 comparable transactions. The repeat sales method (RSM) requires pre-processed indices, based on the historical transaction dataset, while the four other ensemble learning algorithms are trained on five   folds   of the training data. The XGBoost-algorithm combines the underlying models to produce one value estimate.  5 We refer to Chapter 2 of D. H. Wolpert (1992) for a rigorous definition of stacking. However, we do quote said paper and note that " it is in the nature of stacked generalization that presenting it in full generality and full rigor makes it appear more complicated than it really is ".  6 n   =   10000 when the dwelling is an apartment, and   n   =   2000 otherwise.  4.   M ETHODOLOGY   12

---

Comparable Market Analysis  Our AVM tailors the   training data   for each value estimate based on the dwelling it aims to value, thus fitting a unique model to each particular dwelling. The training data is selected to mimic the dwelling as closely as possible. This concept, known as comparable market analysis, is a prevalent valuation principle often applied to real estate valuation (Ratter- mann, 2007). In particular, estate agents use nearby, recent, sales as a starting point when valuing a dwelling. Automated valuation models can mimic this behaviour by tailoring its source data to include transactions of dwellings in close geographical proximity to the dwelling in question. This is a key concept of our model, and is described in Chapter 4.4. 4.2   A TTRIBUTE -B ASED   P RICING   M ETHODS  Traditionally, hedonic pricing methods (HPMs) have been prevalent in academic literature for residential real estate valuations (Balk et al., 2011). HPMs build on the assumption that goods are typically sold as a package of inherent attributes, and implicit prices of these attributes can be estimated from observed prices of differentiated products and the spe- cific amounts of characteristics associated with them (Rosen, 1974). Using these implicit attribute prices, one can predict the selling price of a dwelling from the value of its un- derlying attributes.   However, due to the high degrees of multicollinearity between key variables and potential   omitted variable bias , as discussed in Chapter 3.3, traditional HPMs may suffer from model misspecification (Balk et al., 2011; Wheeler et al., 2005). We propose an alternative approach, where four   ensemble learning methods   are used to generate four independent value estimates.   Each method creates multiple submod- els, fitted to independently sampled input data. When predicting the value of an unseen dwelling, the methods combine each submodel’s prediction to determine the new selling price. The four methods we apply are bagging predictor (BP), random forest (RF), extra trees (ET) 7   and XGBoost (XGB). Before we describe the four ensemble methods, we briefly introduce the underlying machine learning concepts they rely upon, namely   decision trees   and   bootstrapping , in addi- tion to how these methods are adjusted to the datasets through   hyperparameter tuning . In the following subsections we present i) our selected ensemble learning methods and ii) the rationale and challenges around their use.  Ensemble Learning - Key Concepts  Each of our four ensemble methods builds multiple submodels known as   decision trees   and combines every tree’s prediction to produce one value estimate. The number of trees in each ensemble model, as well as the rules for building each tree, are critical choices for the success of the ensemble method.   We will here introduce central concepts related to ensemble learning. A   decision tree   is a simple, but powerful tool for predictive modelling (Lior & Others, 2014). Informally, a decision tree is a tree-structure alike with a flowchart, as illustrated in Figure 7, where each internal node denotes a test of an attribute, the subsequent branching represents the outcome of the test, and each leaf node holds a prediction. Specifically, each internal node in the decision tree splits the dataset into two disjoint sets, on a particular binary test related to a   cut-point   value of a given attribute. The attribute and its cut-point are chosen to minimise an objective function, typically the mean squared error, of each branch. The predictions in the leaf nodes of our decision trees are determined by the average PPSM 8  of the dwellings in the training data directed into that branch. There are several   hyperparameters , regarding the construction of decision trees in each  7 Extra Trees is actually an acronym derived from   Ext remely   ra ndomised trees.  8 As mentioned in Chapter 4.1 we model the PPSM of the dwellings, rather than the selling price.  4.   M ETHODOLOGY   13

---

Figure 7: A descriptive example of a decision tree. Illustrating how binary choices divide the dataset into leaf nodes, where predictions are given on basis of the training set.  ensemble method, which determine the strength of the model. Two essential hyperparam- eters are the   number   of decision trees to build, and the   depth   of each decision tree. Another, more subtle, hyperparameter is the option to use   bootstrapping   or not. By using bootstrap- ping the methods pick random transactions from the training data with replacement. This sampling procedure produces separate datasets for each decision tree. There is a trade-off to consider, when determining the hyperparameters above, between the explanatory power of the model and its computational complexity. In general, increas- ing the number of trees will yield a higher explanatory power, but is more computationally burdensome. A model with high explanatory power captures the prevalent relationships in the data (i.e.   avoiding   underfitting ) while at the same time avoiding identifying non- existing relationships between the attributes (i.e. avoiding   overfitting ).  Optimising the Individual Methods - Hyperparameter Tuning  Both the bagging and boosting algorithms require tuning of hyperparameters to be fit to any particular dataset. This is due to differences in the amount of available data, the num- ber of attributes in the dataset and the structure of the dataset. Some hyperparameters are common for all our algorithms, like the number of decision trees to create and the max- imum depth of each tree, while others are specific for each model.   Table 5 and Table 6 provide a description of the different hyperparameters, and their tuned values. We refer to the documentation from SKLearn and XGBoost for further descriptions of the parameters and their default values (Chen & Guestrin, 2018; Pedregosa et al., 2011). In optimising the parameters for the bagging predictor, random forest and extra trees methods we follow Hauck (2014), which provides an in-depth analysis of parameter tun- ing. When tuning the parameters for XGBoost we follow DMLC (2016), a guide provided by the machine learning community which developed XGBoost. The parameter tuning was implemented by using the   CrossValidation   package in   SKlearn , to search over a set of possible parameters. The search was done iteratively, decreasing the range for each parameter successively to find the optimal value. The cross-validation pro- cedure divides the training data into five separate training and validation sets and runs each model with a given set of hyperparameters on each dataset. It then averages the pre- diction errors on the validation sets and chooses the optimal combination of hyperparame- ters based on a scoring function. We use mean absolute error as the scoring function when selecting the optimal hyperparameters. Note that the hyperparameter tuning is done on the 4.   M ETHODOLOGY   14

---

training data,   not   the testing data (i.e. the data from the first quarter of 2018). Hyperparam- eter tuning on the testing data would lead to overfitting and thus overstated performance estimates.  Bagging - Bagging predictor, Random forest and Extra trees  Bagging is an ensemble technique in which the underlying decision trees are trained in parallel and independently. We utilise three bagging methods, specifically   bagging predic- tor (BP) ,   random forest (RF)   and   extra trees (ET) . Random forest is an extension of bagging predictor, while extra trees extends random forest again.   The methods have subtle, but distinct, variations in the procedure of building decision trees. We will first introduce their common concepts by describing the most general bagging method, namely the bagging predictor, as by Breiman (1996a). Subsequently, we present the extensions made in random forest, as by Breiman (2001), and extra trees, as by Geurts, Ernst, and Wehenkel (2006). We note that we present these algorithms with their tuned hyperparameters. The   bagging predictor   method builds a fixed number of independent decision trees, by sampling the training data with bootstrapping. When constructing each decision tree, the method searches over each attribute and each cut-point to find the attribute that best splits the data at a given node. When calculating the sold price of an unseen dwelling, the bagging predictor averages the estimates from all the decision trees.  Random forest   differs from bagging predictor in the method used for "growing" the un- derlying decision trees. Random forest builds the trees by sampling from only a randomly selected subsample of the attributes at each node split. This is known as   feature bagging . As noted by Breiman (2001), the prediction error of ensembles of tree predictors depends on the strength of the individual trees, as well as the correlation between them. By using feature bagging at each node split, the random forest will tend to reduce the correlation between trees, thus yielding a more robust model for out-of-sample predictions. Feature bagging also has the added benefit of being less computational burdensome. Instead of using feature bagging, as in the random forest method,   extra trees   ran- domises the choice of cut-point of each attribute to learn decorrelated trees.   That is, it arbitrarily chooses a value (cut-point) for each attribute when splitting the trees, instead of trying all possible cut-points. Doing so increases the randomness, in addition to reducing the computational burden of the algorithm.  Table 5: The hyperparameters of bagging predictor (BP), random forest (RF) and extra trees (ET) - descriptions and tuned values.  Variable   Applicable for   Description   Tuned Value Number of trees   BP, RF, ET   The total number of decision trees created   250, 150, 100  Bootstrapping   BP, RF, ET   Whether or not to pick subsamples with replacement   True  Maximum depth   RF   The (maximum) depth of each tree   50  Share of attributes   RF   The share of attributes to use when creating a split   0.33  Boosting - XGBoost  Boosting   is an ensemble technique introduced by Schapire (1989) which trains the underly- ing decision trees   sequentially , with each tree fitted to improve the errors made by preceding trees. As with bagging methods, bootstrapped training data is used to train the underlying trees. In contrast to bagging methods, each new tree improves on the predictions of the pre- vious tree by attempting to improve its "shortcomings". The   AdaBoost   method, proposed by Freund and Schapire (1995), was the first proposal for a boosting algorithm, and was generalised by J. H. . Friedman (2001) into the   Gradient Boosting Machine . During the past five years, there have been several contributions to the development of boosting methods 4.   M ETHODOLOGY   15

---

as a result of the increased interest in data science (Chen & Guestrin, 2016; Schapire, 2013).  XGBoost   is a recently developed boosting method, that has proved successful in a va- riety of machine learning competitions 9 .   We will describe the fundamental concepts of the method, and how we have used and tuned the method to fit our purpose, but refer to Chen and Guestrin (2016) for a thorough explanation of the implementation details of the method. XGBoost is implemented to minimise an objective function consisting of a loss function plus a regularisation term at each iteration. Regularisation is a term added to constrain the model from overfitting. We write the objective function as  Obj   =   ∑  i  l (   ˆ y i ,   y i ) +   ∑  k  Ω (   f k )   (1) where   l ( · ,   · )   is the loss function,   Ω ( · )   is the regularisation term,   f k   is the   k th   decision tree, and ˆ y i   and   y i   are the predicted and actual selling price, respectively, of the   i th   dwelling. The trees are built by splitting leaf nodes on the attribute value which minimises the prespecified objective function. This is done recursively until the trees reach a prespecified maximum depth. In our implementation, the loss term of the objective function is chosen to be the   mean absolute error . The trees are built by adding two new leaf nodes to an existing leaf node, split on the value (cut-point) of the attribute which minimises the objective function. Each leaf contains a weight, determined by the first and second order differential of the loss function and the regularisation term 10 . Each decision tree is trained on the residuals from the previous iteration, continually improving the estimates. When creating a value estimate for a dwelling   x i , XGBoost sums the selected weight for each tree, as shown in (2). ˆ y i   =  K  ∑  k = 1  f k ( x i )   (2) As with the bagging methods, XGBoost has several important hyperparameters that one needs to set when developing the method. Their tuned values and practical implications are summarised by Table 6 11 .  Table 6: The tuned hyperparameters of XGBoost, both as a model-stacker and as an underlying method - descriptions and tuned values.  Variable   Description   Tuned Value Learning rate   The step-size shrinkage used in each update   0.005  Number of iterations   The number of trees to build   1 000  Gamma   The minimum loss reduction required to make a split   0  Maximum depth   The (maximum) dept of each tree   5  Subsample   The share of data points to used when building a tree   0.8  Colsample by tree   The share of attributes to used when building a tree   0.8  Evaluation Metric   The loss function the algorithm aims to minimise   MAE  Model Rationale and Challenges  We argue that there are several advantages with ensemble learning methods compared to other alternatives. The primary rationale of these methods is that they are non-parametric, i.e. they do not require any rich   a priori   knowledge regarding the underlying data gener- ating process. This allows the method to adapt to the underlying data and model poten-  9 See D. Nielsen (2016) for a comprehensive analysis of the method’s success.  10 See equation 5, and related descriptions, of Chen and Guestrin (2016) for the technical rationale of this.  11 We use the default values for the remaining hyperparameters in XGBoost.  4.   M ETHODOLOGY   16

---

tial non-linear relationships.   In contrast, the traditional HPMs do not model non-linear relationships and tend to make strict assumptions about the data, such as linearity and homoscedasticity. Further, we find the ensemble learning methods to be ideal for the amount of rele- vant and available training data. More complex non-linear models, such as artificial neural networks (ANNs), often require many more degrees of freedom to yield high predictive power (Bishop, 2006, Chapter 5), which quickly may result in   overfitting   in the case of lim- ited data supply. Similarly, simpler models such as HPMs based on ordinary least squares (OLS) may not be able to fully utilise the dataset, due to a constrained functional form. We discuss the use of OLS and ANNs in Chapter 5.3 and Appendix A.1 with references to achieved empirical results with such models. We also note that the selected ensemble learning methods require minimal   feature en- gineering 12 , especially concerning the grouping of attributes into categorical variables, but also transformations of continuous variables. The underlying decision trees are constructed to learn such patterns without requiring significant domain knowledge. This makes our model simpler to apply and more robust in dynamic real-estate markets. On the other hand, we acknowledge that the ensemble methods do not provide the same degree of transparency as the simpler OLS-based HPMs. The HPMs yield price es- timates of individual attributes, while the ensemble learning methods, which are more elaborate, can be harder to interpret. However, there are certain methods for producing  attribute importances   for the underlying attributes. In Chapter 5.3 we give a demonstration of one such attribute importance calculation. We believe that these techniques provide a sufficient degree of transparency for most applications of AVMs. Another potential challenge with ensemble learning methods is that, as they do not make any underlying assumptions of the distribution of the data, they may struggle to generalise beyond the observed training data. They are therefore heavily reliant on an ex- tensive dataset to yield robust results. We do not expect this to be an issue for our model as we use a comparable pricing approach to select and engineer the training data, as we will elaborate in Chapter 4.4.   That is, we select training data which is tailored to suit the dwelling in question, thus making the model highly likely to generalise to the given dwelling. 4.3   R EPEAT   S ALES   M ETHOD  We use the repeat sales method (RSM) to create a separate index for each district in Oslo, with the aim of capturing the appreciation or depreciation in the market over time, as discussed in Chapter 2.3. The indices are used to produce price estimates for all previously sold dwellings in our dataset, by adjusting each dwelling’s previous selling price with the appropriate index. The RSM was introduced in the seminal paper by Bailey et al. (1963) and builds an index model by considering dwellings which have been sold more than once. The model is ex- ceedingly simple and provides a basis to predict the price of any previously sold dwelling. The method’s core idea is that the ratio of selling prices, for the same dwelling, at two distinct times can be thought of as a ratio of an (unobservable) index for the local area at the two selling times multiplied by an error term. This idea is justified under a constant- quality assumption, i.e. an assumption that the quality of a dwelling does not deteriorate or improve drastically over time. We opt for using a repeat sales method based on the specifications described in Case  12 This is the process of transforming the attributes to create new attributes which capture domain-knowledge of the prediction problem. An example could be creating an attribute for the existence of an elevator in the dwelling’s building   and   the dwelling being in the third storey or above.  4.   M ETHODOLOGY   17

---

and Shiller (1987). Although there are other implementations of the RSM 13 , we note that the RSM by Case and Shiller (1987) is deemed the favourable implementation both in academia and for industrial applications (Balk et al., 2011; S&P Dow Jones Indices, n.d.). The model is stated as a weighted least squares (WLS), with the logarithm of the ratios of the selling prices as the endogenous variables and the selling times as exogenous variables. The full implementation details are left for Appendix A.3. We note that we only consider condominiums when constructing the indices. This is due to our   historical transactions dataset   missing data regarding common debt and the sig- nificant share of common debt in cooperatives, as described in Chapter 3.1 and Chapter 3.3, respectively. Although this may lead to partially biased indices, we find that this alter- native provides the better utilisation of our dataset.  Model Rationale and Challenges  The repeat sales method (RSM) has the major advantage of isolating actual increases in the price of a dwelling without requiring detailed information about the characteristics of individual properties. As discussed in Chapter 2, there are several explanatory variables not included in our dataset.   In theory, the RSM provides unbiased results of the price increases, by controlling for location at the finest level, that is to say, the specific address. A considerable weakness of the RSM is that, as it does not require the measurement of the dwelling quality or characteristics, it places the assumption of constant quality for individual dwellings across time. In the case of our dataset, spanning more than a quarter- century, we are prone to encounter dwellings that have been upgraded or altered in some significant form. This will possibly bias our results. However, by using the RSM as by Case and Shiller (1987), the repeat sales with longer time spans between them are potentially attributed less weight in the estimation of the model. 4.4   C OMPARABLE   P RICING AND   S TACKING OF   M ODELS  In this section, we combine the aforementioned concepts and methods to complete the de- scription of our AVM. In particular, we describe the procedure for selecting the comparable transactions and the stacking of individual methods.  Comparable Pricing  The ensemble learning submodels of the AVM are trained separately for each value esti- mate. That is, the ensemble learning methods are trained on   comparable recent sales , which are selected based on the location and type of the dwelling. Specifically, we select the   n   ge- ographically nearest transactions 1415   of dwellings that are apartments, or non-apartments, depending on the unit type we aim to value. Further, we add a   ranking   variable to these transactions, i.e. rank   ∈   [ 1, 2, . . . ,   n ] , which is a proximity measure, increasing with distance from the target dwelling. The comparable pricing approach enables the ensemble methods to explicitly recognise geographically close, recent, transactions when valuing a dwelling. We note that, as the comparable transactions are selected from the enhanced transactions dataset, they are all from August 2016 or later. Therefore, we do not eliminate any transactions based on the sold date when selecting the comparables.  13 Two prominent alternatives for creating real estate indices are by Bailey et al. (1963) and Calhoun (1996), which only vary in their assumptions of the heteroscedasticity of the underlying regression problem.  14 n   =   10000, if the dwelling is an apartment, and   n   =   2000 if not. The distinction is made due to data availability of transactions for the two types of dwellings.  15 Note that distance between two points in spherical geometry is not given by the Pythagorean formula, but by the Haversine formula. See p. 159 of Sinnott (1984) for a description of this formula and the rationale.  4.   M ETHODOLOGY   18

---

Stacking of Models  In addition to using XGBoost as an underlying method, we leverage it as a stacking method, or   model-stacker . As described in the introduction to Chapter 4, XGBoost is used as a meta- estimator with both the exogenous variables and the value estimates from the individual models as input. This stacking procedure is described in detail in Procedure 2 below. 16  P ROCEDURE   2: The automated valuation model  1) Let the dwelling, whose current selling price we wish to predict, be de- noted by   u . 2) Select   n   comparable transactions, as described above, and denote the set of these transactions as   training data   or   X  3) For each model   m   ∈ { XGB OOST , R ANDOM   F OREST , E XTRA   T REES , B AGGING   P REDICTOR } : a) Divide the training data into   k   =   5 random subsets of equal size, denoted by   X i ,   i   =   1 . . .   k . For each of the subsets   X i : i) Fit   m   to training data   not   in   X i   to get a fitted model   m i  ii) Use   m i   to get estimates of sold price of data in   X i . Denote these estimates by ˆ P i , and extend the training data   X i   with ˆ P i . iii) Use   m i   to get an estimate of the sold price of   u . Denote this estimate by ˆ u i  b) Average the   k   predictions of the price of dwelling   u   to get ˆ u   =  1  k   ∑ k i = 1   u i , and extend the dwelling data   u   with ˆ u . 4) For each data point in the training data   X   and for the dwelling   u  a) Find all previous sales for the dwelling. b) Use the Repeat Sales price indices to generate price estimates based on each of the previous sales. c) Extend the data for the relevant dwelling with an average of the Repeat Sales price estimates, as well as the number of predictions. If there are no previous sales we extend the data with 0 and 0. 5) Finally, fit another XGB OOST   model to the, now extended, training data  X   and use the model to predict a selling price for   u .  Model Rationale and Challenges  Using estimates from a diverse set of estimators enables our AVM to deliver robust results with high predictive power. Although it is a contemporary approach in the field of econo- metrics, the idea of stacking different ensemble learning methods is gaining traction both in academia (Campos, Canuto, Salles, de Sá, & Gonçalves, 2017; D. Wolpert & Macready, 1996) and in international data science competitions (Adam-Bourdarios et al., 2015; Alves, 2017; Kaggle, 2018). In essence, we choose a powerful stacking method, namely XGBoost, due to its ability to detect when each base model performs well or poorly, and combine the underlying predictions correspondingly. Stacking is highly effective when the under- lying models are diverse, and we do this by selecting both an array of ensemble learning methods and a repeat sales method. Nevertheless, there are some drawbacks of combining stacked generalisation with com- parable market analysis. By applying comparable market analysis we require one instance  16 We refer the interested reader to our Python implementation of steps 3-5 of Procedure 2, which can be found in Appendix A.7.  4.   M ETHODOLOGY   19

---

of the model to be trained for each value estimation, and by stacking multiple individ- ual models, each such estimation becomes increasingly complex. Specifically, the model encompasses five ensemble learning method, of which four are trained five times.   The combined effect of these choices is that of increased model training time. We analyse and discuss the practical implications of this in Chapter 5.5. 4.5   O UT - OF -S AMPLE   P REDICTION  As our motivation for the development of the algorithm is the real-world application, we seek to train and evaluate our model using realistic data. Therefore we opt for an evaluation of the model’s   out-of-sample   predictions, that is the model’s predictions on unseen data. To achieve this, we partition our datasets as described below. When evaluating our model we divide our data into two disjoint sets, one which is used as a   training set   and the other being   test set . We define the training set and the test set as the transactions before and after a given point in time, denoted as the   split . By training our model on data from the training set and evaluating it on the test set, we simulate a real-life scenario where the model is trained on data recorded up to a given day and produces value estimates on possible transactions the next day. We perform this split on a monthly basis, while in practice one would update the data supply every day. Hence, our results should be interpreted as a conservative performance estimate of the out-of-sample predictive power of the model.   When evaluating our model in Chapter 5, we make three such partitions using the following   splits : i) January 1 st   2018, 00:00 ii) February 1 st   2018, 00:00 iii) March 1 st   2018, 00:00 For each dwelling in the test set, we choose the comparable transactions from the corre- sponding training set, as discussed in Chapter 4.4. Similarly, when applying the RSM to predict previously sold dwellings in the test set we use indices built solely on the training set. As we have the attribute   sold month   in our dataset, we set this to be equal to the previ- ous month for all dwellings in the test set. Thus, when making predictions with both the ensemble learning methods and the RSM, we are predicting the selling price as if the sold date was the first day of the month. 4.   M ETHODOLOGY   20

---

5 R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION  In this chapter we analyse and discuss the performance of our automated valuation model and its submodels, in addition to discussing important model choices and potential chal- lenges. We begin, in Chapter 5.1, by evaluating the performance of our AVM by comparing its precision to estate agents, as well as the American industry leader for real estate AVMs, namely Zillow 17 .   Then, in Chapter 5.2 we justify the use of   stacked generalisation   in our model by comparing the performance of the AVM to the underlying submodels. Next, in Chapter 5.3 and Chapter 5.4 we make empirical justifications for the choice of submodels. Finally, in Chapter 5.5 we discuss the strengths and weaknesses of our AVM in the light of the presented results. 5.1   E VALUATION OF THE   P ERFORMANCE OF OUR   AVM To analyse the performance of our AVM, and discuss its potential commercial applications, we here examine the distribution of the value predictions of our AVM and compare it to estate agents and industry leaders. Our AVM achieves an overall median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) of 5.4 % in January, February and March 2018, as illustrated in Table 7. When comparing the perfor- mances of our AVM with that of the estate agents, by analysing Table 7 and Table 8, we find very similar performances. Both the quantiles and the MdAPEs are close to identical, while the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of our AVM is slightly better than the MAPE of the estate agents. We note that the tables are not directly comparable, as the transac- tions are from different time periods. The difference in time periods is due to a lack of data from   Eiendomsverdi   for transactions in 2018, and insufficient training data in our enhanced transactions dataset to produce value estimates in 2016 and 2017.  Table 7: The share of the predictions of the   automated valuation model (AVM)   that are within 5 %, 10 % and 20 % of the correct value and the median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) - out-of-sample performance for Q1 2018 Within 5 %   Within 10 %   Within 20 %   MdAPE   MAPE Q1 2018   46.9 %   76.4 %   96.3 %   5.4 %   7.2 % Table 8: The share of the predictions of   estate agents   that are within 5 %, 10 % and 20 % of the actual selling price and the overall median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) - Data from   Eiendomsverdi , including 15 786 transactions in Oslo in 2016 and 2017 Within 5 %   Within 10 %   Within 20 %   MdAPE   MAPE 2016/2017   47.8 %   74.0 %   96.5 %   5.3 %   7.6 %  Further, we compare our AVMs performance with the performance of Zillow, the American industry leader for real estate AVMs. Zillow creates similar value estimates for more than 100 millon dwellings in the U.S., and publish their aggregated performances for a handful selected cities. Table 9 illustrates some of these performances.  17 https://www.zillow.com/corp/About.htm . Retrieved May 27 th   2018  5.   R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION   21

---

Table 9: The share of Zillow’s Zestimates   1   which are within 5 %, 10 % and 20 % of the actual selling price and the overall median absolute percentage error (MdAPE). Provided for a selection of U.S. cities. Within 5 %   Within 10 %   Within 20 %   MdAPE Baltimore, MD   54.6 %   73.6 %   85.1 %   4.3 % Boston, MA   53.9 %   78.1 %   89.9 %   4.5 % Charlotte, NC   52.3 %   72.3 %   84.1 %   4.7 % Chicago, IL   56.7 %   76.8 %   88.5 %   4.1 % Cincinnati, OH   46.4 %   68.4 %   84.0 %   5.5 % Cleveland, OH   44.8 %   65.4 %   80.2 %   6.0 % Dallas-Fort Worth, TX   33.1 %   57.2 %   79.6 %   8.2 % Denver, CO   65.5 %   86.1 %   94.5 %   3.3 % Detroit, MI   50.9 %   71.9 %   85.6 %   4.8 % 1) The data is gathered from   www.zillow.com/zestimate/   on May 27 th   2018.  As we see in Table 9, the MdAPEs of Zillow vary between 3.3% and 8.2%, which is both considerably better and worse than our model’s performance. In addition, we observe that none of the cities have a higher amount of estimations within 20% of the selling price than Denver, whose value is 94.5%. Here our model clearly outperforms Zillow, with above 96% of the estimations being within 20% of the selling price. In addition, Zillow has data de- scribing roughly 1-2 millions dwellings in each of the presented cities, which is a consider- ably larger amount of training data than we have had access to. It is clear that one needs to interpret the comparison of the performances with caution, due to the obvious differences between markets and data availability. However, the comparison does illustrate some of the potential commercial value of our AVM. On a final note, we remark a behavioural finance aspect of the comparisons made in this section. The predictions of both the estate agents and Zillow are made (and published) prior to the selling price being established, and thus, are likely to influence the buyer and seller. We believe that this can have two effects: Estate agents might aim to price a dwelling lower than the expected selling price to attract many potential buyers, and hence start a bidding war.   We observe that roughly 61 % of value estimates (asking prices) by estate agents are lower than the final selling price. In addition, by the   anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic , as presented in psychological literature 18 , such reference points are prone to bias the transaction participants, and the final selling price is likely to be insufficiently adjusted away from the   anchor . 5.2   E VALUATION OF THE   S TACKED   M ODEL  To justify the application of stacked generalisation in our AVM, we perform a thorough evaluation of the effect of stacking. First, we compare the accuracy, measured in MdAPE, of the stacked model with that of the selected ensemble learning methods, the repeat sales method (RSM) and a simple OLS-based HPM. Then, we analyse the performance against training time of our models, to find the optimal number of comparables to use at each val- uation. Finally we reason for the choice of stacking the four ensemble learning methods, by analysing and discussing the correlations of the out-of-sample residuals of the underlying ensemble learning methods and the model-stacker.  Comparison of the Stacked Model to the Individual Models  To justify the use of stacked generalisation in our AVM, we compare the accuracy of the stacked model to that of the underlying models. The comparison is done out-of-sample for January, February and March 2018, as well as in aggregate for the three months. The  18 Seminal works by Slovic and Lichtenstein (1971) and Kahneman and Tversky (1972) introduce and discuss this heuristic, while Northcraft and Neale (1987) considers it empirically in the setting of the residential real estate market in Tuscon, Arizona, finding that the   "subject populations were significantly biased by listing prices" .  5.   R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION   22

---

results are presented in Table 10. We observe that the automated valuation model (AVM) performs significantly better than the individual models on average. We also note that the RSM performs considerably poorer than all the other underlying methods. The inclusion of this method has been justified theoretically in Chapter 2.3 and Chapter 4.3, and will be justified empirically below.  Table 10: The median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) of the automated valuation model (AVM) compared to the ensemble learning methods and the repeat sales method (RSM), as well as an OLS-based hedonic pricing method - out-of-sample performance Q1 2018. Ensemble Learning   Repeat Sales 1   Traditional   Stacked Model BP   RF   ET   XGB   OLS   XGB-S 2018 - January   6.23 %   6.31 %   6.21 %   6.13 %   8.93 %   8.95 %   5.49   % 2018 - February   5.60 %   5.70 %   5.71 %   5.56 %   8.86 %   8.85 %   4.94   % 2018 - March   5.81 %   5.47 %   5.64 %   5.90 %   9.42 %   8.46 %   5.50   % Total   5.95 %   5.90 %   5.92 %   5.99 %   9.05 %   8.77 %   5.36   % 1) The MdAPE for the RSM is only calculated for the dwellings which have previous sales, which constitutes 77% of the dwellings in the test set.  We further examine the correlations between the individual models residuals, to compare their value estimates and discuss the potential gain of stacking. Figure 8 illustrates the cor- relations between the ensemble learning methods residuals out-of-sample. 19   An apparent observation is the high positive correlation between the individual methods. We choose to include all the four methods since no single method yields strictly better results, and be- lieve that the stacking algorithm should be able to choose the optimal combination of them. It is clear from Figure 8 that the model-stacker (XGB-S) is able to detect relationships in the data not captured by the individual methods, hence yielding better out-of-sample results.  Figure 8: The Pearson correlation coefficients of the residuals of the automated valuation model (denoted by XGB-S) and the submodels (XGBoost (XGB), bagging predictor (BP), random forest (RF) and extra trees (ET)). A lighter colour, and higher positive number, indicates a higher positive correlation. We observe high correlations between the residuals.  Selecting the Number of Comparable Transactions  Figure 9 displays how training time and accuracy, represented by the MdAPE, increases with the number of comparable transactions for each valuation, for February 2018. We ob- serve that the training time is more or less linear in the number of comparable transactions. With only 50 comparable transactions, the model is able to score an out-of-sample MdAPE  19 We do not include the RSM here, due to it only covering 77% of the transactions.  5.   R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION   23

---

of about 6%. The further gain towards 5% MdAPE, however, is computationally burden- some.   We observe no further improvements after including 10 000 comparable transac- tions, and choose this as the number of comparables in our final model, due to training time constraints.  Figure 9: Accuracy and training time 20 of the automated valuation model (AVM) for varying number comparable sales. Results from February 2018 (470 transactions).   Note that the x-axis is not linear in number of comparable sales  5.3   E VALUATION OF THE   A TTRIBUTE -B ASED   P RICING   M ETHODS  Here we assess the choices made during the selection and tuning of the attribute-based pricing methods.   We provide empirical reasoning for the choice of decision tree-based methods, by comparing the out-of-sample performance of our selected methods with a HPM based on ordinary least squares (OLS). Subsequently, we analyse the importance of the individual attributes in one of our ensemble learning methods and discuss the absence of substantial feature engineering of our data.  Boosting and Bagging vs. OLS - Out-of-Sample Accuracy  Table 10 illustrates the out-of-sample performance of the selected ensemble learning meth- ods and our AVM, compared to a regular OLS-based HPM 21 . We note that the OLS-based HPM uses the same set of attributes as the ensemble learning methods. The performance of the ensemble learning methods is superior to OLS in each of the test months, as they outperform the HPM by more than 30 % on average. We acknowledge that the HPM might suffer from the lack of feature engineering.   That is, it might obtain better results with transformation and grouping attributes in a pre-processing step. However, we find that performing a feature engineering process of a HPM to be outside of the scope of this pa- per, and rather note that the superiority of the ensemble learning methods justifies their inclusion in our model.  Attribute Importance  As introduced in Chapter 4.2, AVMs using ensemble learning are harder to interpret than OLS-based HPMs. However, this can be addressed by analysing the models’ underlying   de- cision trees , either by simply displaying the individual trees, as illustrated in Appendix A.2, or by analysing aggregated statistics from each model, such as   attribute importance . This is a score given to each attribute based on its importance in increasing the model’s perfor- mance. There are several methods for calculating this based on the aggregate frequency of  20 The training time is achieved with our implementation as it is described in Appendix A.6.  21 See p. 50 of Balk et al. (2011) for a presentation of this method.  5.   R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION   24

---

occurrence and placement of the attributes in the decision trees 22 . Here we give an example of analysing attribute importance for the XGBoost-algorithm using the definition given in Chen and Guestrin (2018). For the XGBoost-algorithm, attribute importance is given as the share of predictive power brought by including a particular attribute in the decision trees (Chen & Guestrin, 2018). These scores are denoted as   α i   ∈   [ 0, 1 ] , where   ∑ i   α i   =   1. Since we build a separate model for each dwelling, we analyse the model built for one particular apartment, sold in Oslo in March 2018. The apartment is a condominium situ- ated in the district Gamle Oslo and has 82 USM. It was constructed in 2013, has four rooms and is located on the fifth floor. Figure 10 illustrates the attribute importance of the most important attributes when building the decision trees for the XGBoost-algorithm for the discussed apartment. We observe that the numerical attributes are considered to be far more important than the categorical attributes when building the decision trees. Specifically, the location, rep- resented by longitude and latitude, size of dwelling represented by USM and date of the transaction, represented by the   Days since sale -attribute, are the most important attributes. We observe some variables with 0.0 attribute importance score, such as districts far from the selected dwelling. We find these observations to be reasonable. The numerical variables have a larger num- ber of possible   cut-points   than the binary categorical variables and therefore can be used more often to split the dataset into good partitions. The variables that have received the highest attribute scores are the ones most often associated with selling prices of dwellings. The fact that some attributes receive a score of 0.0 for one particular model does not hinder the attribute from being important in another model. This illustrates the model’s ability to adapt to the underlying data.  Figure 10: The relative importance of the most important attributes when valuing the dwelling specified above, calculated as a ranking score of the underlying XGBoost-model.  22 We refer to Chapters   10.13   and   15.3   of J. Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani (2001) for an overview of variable importance estimations.  5.   R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION   25

---

A Summary of the Explored Attribute-Based Pricing Methods  The choice of using ensemble learning methods as our attribute-based pricing methods was made on an extended exploratory analysis of the state-of-the-art machine learning techniques. Here we briefly summarise the choices explored, and refer to Appendix A.1 and Table 10 for comparable results. First, we acknowledge that traditional hedonic methods, such as those based on ordi- nary least squares (OLS), might yield favourable results in some situations. Given a smaller dataset, less training time or a desire to study more familiar statistics such as condition numbers, coefficients of determination or other statistical measures, we believe that tradi- tional hedonic methods could be applied with decent precision. We refer to Table 10 for comparable results. Second, we believe that there are potential gains from a further investigation of en- semble learning techniques. In particular there are promising techniques like   CatBoost   by Yandex (2018) and   LightGBM   by Microsoft’s Ke et al. (2017) that have gained attraction in the Kaggle-community recently. The drawback of these techniques is usually their compu- tational burden, which is also the reason why we have opted not to include them in our AVM. Third, we considered, and explored, the use of artificial neural network (ANN) as a submodel in our AVM. ANNs have recently gained much attention in both commercial and machine learning communities. The findings from our exploration, however, is that these techniques are considerably hard to apply for an econometrician, due to their large number of hyperparameters and low interpretability. We provide a brief summary of our experiences developing an ANN as a submodel for our AVM, and a discussion of why the model was not included, in Appendix A.1.   In short, we found the process of designing the network to be a highly specialised engineering process, with extremely many design choices and only a handful of established guidelines. Whether or not these techniques can yield superior results is therefore left as an open question. 5.4   E VALUATION OF THE   R EPEAT   S ALES   M ETHOD  As illustrated in Table 10 the RSM has a considerably poorer performance than all the other individual models, and similar performance to the OLS-based HPM in Table 10. One might therefore question the inclusion of the model in the AVM. However, as argued in Chapter 2.3 and Chapter 4.3, the RSM is trained on a separate dataset and aims to capture different market movements than the ensemble learning methods. We therefore believe that the in- clusion of the RSM in the AVM has a benefit. To empirically justify this decision, we run the AVM as described in Procedure 2, but without Step 4), and compare the performance to that of the AVM’s. We present this comparison in Table 11, and note that the MdAPE increases by 8% overall when excluding the RSM from the model. This indicates a con- siderable benefit of including the RSM. We note that the number of previous sales for the dwelling is included in the training data for the model-stacker, in addition to RSM’s predic- tion. This attribute is also likely to yield significant explanatory power, as dwellings sold often might have special characteristics.  Table 11: The share of the predictions that are within 5 %, 10 % and 20 % of the selling price and the median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) using the  automated valuation model (AVM) with and without repeat sales method (RSM)   - out-of-sample performance for Q1 2018. Within 5 %   Within 10 %   Within 20 %   MdAPE   MAPE AVM incl. RSM   46.89 %   76.36 %   96.31 %   5.36 %   7.17 % AVM excl. RSM   45.52 %   73.23 %   95.08 %   5.81 %   7.43 %  5.   R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION   26

---

5.5   M ODEL   D ISCUSSION  In this section we discuss and critique our model, both with regards to the hypothesised model rationales in Chapter 4 and in the context of the empirical results provided above. We begin by reiterating three of the main conjectured strengths of our model and elab- orate on these in turn. First, we argued that applying stacked generalisation would allow our model to combine the predictions of several submodels with improved results. In the results Table 10 and Table 11, we find this to be the case, as the stacked model’s performance clearly improves upon the individual methods. Second, while developing the model, we hypothesised that the use of comparable mar- ket analysis would be beneficial as the model would benefit the most from nearby trans- actions. However, as Figure 9 illustrates, we observed that including up to 10 000 transac- tions, with the additional ranking variables, yielded superior results. Third, we emphasise the benefits of ensemble learning techniques within the field of econometrics. The non-parametric nature of the methods makes them applicable to a wide range of tasks. Even though ensemble learning methods are novel tools in econometrics, they often provide superior results to traditional methods and therefore becoming increas- ingly popular. The major drawback of applying stacked generalisation in a model is the training time it demands, due to the required predictions made on the training data by the individual folds. Depending on the quality of the implementation 23   the model runs in 60-400 seconds, for a single prediction. For practical applications, this imposes certain constraints on the design of the service.   However, we argue that the value of a strong model exceeds the drawback of time complexity. Furthermore, we note that the model can easily be adapted to the demands of training time. In practice, several instances of the model could be run in parallel to give the user improved results as the different instances are completed. A challenge for the non-parametric ensemble learning methods is that they require suf- ficiently diverse training data to achieve strong out-of-sample predictive force. Specifically, they do not generalise well outside the observed range of attribute values, as they do not make any prior assumptions about the underlying data.   However, as we discovered in the results above, the model is not only able to predict with high accuracy, but also with a strong precision. That is, that in addition to a low MdAPE, it has a high share of predictions within a 20% deviation. This is compelling evidence of the model’s ability to generalise well to the given dataset, and consequently, its suitability for use in AVMs. Another drawback is the model’s lacks of transparency and, to a certain extent, its lack of underlying model assumptions. Although we have explained how the model may be visualised using attribute importance and by displaying the underlying decision trees, we do concede that this may be insufficient for use in public policy. A major transition from traditional HPMs to ensemble learning AVMs, is the shift from a   theory-driven   to a   data- driven   approach, where the econometrician defines fewer of the model’s assumptions.  23 Quality of the implementation depends largely on choices regarding programming language, parallelisation and pre-processing. See Appendix A.6 for an overview and discussion of our implementation.  5.   R ESULTS AND   D ISCUSSION   27

---

6  C ONCLUSION  6.1   M OTIVATION , F INDINGS AND   R EMARKS  The aim of this study was to develop a commercially viable automated valuation model (AVM) and to aid in progressing the field of real estate finance. To assess the model, we sought to implement and evaluate this model on the residential real estate market in Oslo. By   stacking   four different ensemble learning methods and the repeat sales method (RSM) into an AVM, and evaluating it on transaction data for real estate in Oslo, we achieve these goals. Specifically, we train the model on data comprising 25 years of transactions and two years of enhanced data including key dwelling attributes and test the model out-of-sample on all transactions in Oslo in the first quarter of 2018. The model estimates the value of the 1 979 dwellings sold in Q1 of 2018, with a median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) of 5.4%. Comparing this to the precision of estate agents in Oslo and Zillow, the industry leader in the U.S., we find our AVM to have produced highly promising results. This study has two main implications, regarding the performance our AVM and the methodological techniques applied to construct it. The comparison of our AVM with the accuracy of Zillow indicates that we achieve a sufficient precision to be commercially vi- able. We seek to continue to work with Alva Technologies to improve upon their models, and create a service that provides access to a publicly available AVM for Oslo. We also find the novel combination of ensemble learning and real estate indices to be a substantial addi- tion to the current field of research, which is both fragmented and to some degree hidden by private industrial actors. Two aspects of the model which were the subject of concern during its development were its computational complexity and degree of interpretability. To achieve our goal of making the AVM valuable in real-life applications, we opted to design a model with sub- stantial computational complexity. At the same time, we have shown that one could sig- nificantly decrease this complexity, at the price of a lower model precision. We have also addressed how available tools have been designed to increase the degree of interpretability of the ensemble learning methods, and believe that they are sufficient for the main appli- cations of an AVM. 6.2   F URTHER   R ESEARCH  To conclude, we wish to focus on possible improvements that can be made to the AVM. We begin by briefly discussing alternative applications of the AVM, as well as the correspond- ing adaptions which would be needed to be made. Further, we discuss enrichment of the source data, as well as enhancements of the individual submodels and the overall model design.  Applications  As introduced in Chapter 1, there are several direct applications of AVMs, including the needs of homeowners, policymakers and loan providers. But with minor adjustments, we believe that the model could have applications within other realms. We briefly exemplify two such possibilities: general asset pricing and real estate development. Traditional asset pricing methods are built on the two polar approaches of   absolute   and   relative   pricing (p. 8 Cochrane, 2009), which price assets by measuring exposure to fundamental sources of risk and by comparing similar asset prices, respectively. We view the use of AVMs for both the methods as a feasible approach, as the transactional data which exists for most assets is often of higher quality than that of the residential real estate markets. We also believe that 6.   C ONCLUSION   28

---

leveraging the AVM for use in real estate development is highly feasible. By calculating  marginal attribute prices 24 , one could estimate the marginal value of individual attributes given a specific dwelling.  Enrichment of source data  One aspect to which we have paid little attention is that of extending the primary datasets which we have received, as we have deemed this to be outside of the scope of our work. We do, however, believe that there are several industrial and government actors who have potentially beneficial data sources, such as   Finn.no 25   and   The Norwegian Mapping Authority . These data could be   structured data , regarding dwellings’ characteristics, but also complex  unstructured data , such as images and natural language descriptions of dwellings. Structured data, if acquired for the dwellings in the enhanced dataset, would likely be easy to incorporate into the model, and would only require retuning the hyperparameters of the ensemble learning techniques. If data regarding the dwellings in the historical trans- actions were acquired, then more complex models for the RSM, such as by Abraham and Schauman (1991), may be applied with potential success. In the case of acquiring unstructured data, one would need to pre-process it before po- tentially including it in the model. The development and implementation of such process- ing steps are out of the scope of most econometricians’ work, but we consider a brief ex- ample here; The application of keyword extraction from classified advertisements 26   could yield additional attributes for our model, further increasing the model’s performance 27 . In addition to enriching and extending our data, we note that improving the quality and quantity of the existing datasets is likely to be fruitful to the model performance.  Alternatives to the individual and stacking methods  The use of a repeat sales method in combination with the ensemble learning methods in an AVM is a novel approach and has yielded impressive results.   We find the study of combining methods based on transactional data with methods based on attribute-specific data to be an interesting and little-explored field of research. Therefore, we suggest further exploration of the combinations of such methods. It is clear that there are an array of available regression methods, particularly from the realm of machine learning, that can be applied to AVMs. The amount and variety of dif- ferent regression techniques are increasing, and we have implemented and tested some of the most common, as discussed in Chapter 5.3. We believe that there are exciting devel- opments, particularly within the field of   boosting   and   artificial neural networks , that can be beneficial for future AVMs.  24 The marginal price of an attribute for a given dwelling could be estimated simply by adjusting the attribute’s value by an appropriately small value (in the case of numerical attributes) or by changing the attribute’s label (in the case of categorical attributes). The change in the model’s prediction would yield an estimate of the   marginal attribute price   for the given attribute.  25 Finn.no is a Norwegian classified advertisements website with advertisements for nearly all dwellings sold on the free market.  26 Examples of relevant keywords may be "kitchen renovated in 2016", "balcony", "needs renovation", etc.  27 The interested reader may view Bharti and Babu (2017) for an overview over relevant approaches for keyword extraction approaches, as a processing procedure for unstructured data in various domains.  6.   C ONCLUSION   29

---

A  A PPENDIX  A.1   A N   E VALUATION OF   A RTIFICIAL   N EURAL   N ETWORKS AS   AVM S  Background  ANNs are a class of machine learning techniques which models learning tasks by combin- ing a collection of units, known as   artificial neurons , each of which applies a simple threshold function, known as   activation functions , to its input. These neurons are typically organised in layers, with connections between neurons in adjacent layers which can transmit the out- puts of a layer as inputs to the following layer, adjusted by a certain   weight . The activation functions, the learning method and the structure of neurons and layers are determined by the user, while the model learns the weights of the network from the relevant training data. Although ANNs are known to be able to approximate any finite mathematical func- tion 28   and have been in existence for several decades, they can be hard to adapt and ap- ply to many learning problems. This is due to their complex training procedure and non- parametric structure.  Implementation  To design our implementation of an ANN we relied heavily on Bengio (2012) and Goodfel- low, Bengio, and Courville (2016) as conceptual guides, as well as a plethora of forums in the data science community, including Kaggle and TowardsDataScience 29 . To implement the design, we used the   MLPRegressor -package by   scikit-learn   for Python. This package provides a sufficiently broad toolkit for our exploration. There are a few generally accepted practices for applying ANNs, such as normalisation of input data and the use of mini-batches 30 , which we apply. For the model’s hyperparam- eters we use a selection of default and recommended parameters 31 , as well as an educated guess combined with a grid-search and cross-validation.   The most challenging task we faced here was the structure of the neurons, that is, the number of layers, the number of neurons per layer and the connections between each layer. The choices here are numerous, and the use of a grid-search alone to determine the appropriate choice is infeasible due to the exponential increase in computational requirements. Our final model is the most stable result, with fairly consistent results. We provide the selected hyperparameters in Table 13.  Results and Discussion  The results of our work are presented in Table 12, which also includes the stacked AVM for comparison. We see that our implementation of an ANN performs far poorer than the AVM. Although we believe there to be superior implementations of ANNs for this problem, we can not determine it by any structured approach and have to rely largely on guesswork and grid-searches. When considering the solutions used in several Kaggle-competitions, we find that ANNs are prevalent as submodels, but rarely used without a model-stacker. Furthermore, researching recent literature 32   reveals that the inherent struggle of training ANNs is an established issue.  28 This is known as the universal approximation theorem (Cybenko, 1989).  29 www.towardsdatascience.com . Retrieved May 27 th   2018  30 Mini-batches are randomised subsamples of the training data, which lets the network train faster and with less memory.  31 Neurons’ activation functions are set to   ReLU   (Glorot, Bordes, & Bengio, 2011) and the weight optimiser is set to   Adam   (Kingma & Ba, 2014). Both these choices are well-established for regression problems, although even these have several prominent alternatives.  32 See Chapter 5 of M. A. Nielsen (2015) for a conceptual understanding of some of the challenges in designing ANNs, and Glorot and Bengio (2010) for a more technical treatment of the reasons.  A. A PPENDIX   30

---

Our conclusion from this exploration is that, although ANNs are universal approxima- tors, they require a great deal of experience to apply with success, and are currently closer to an art-form than an engineering process. We believe ensemble learning methods to be more consistent and more straightforward to apply, and prefer these for regression prob- lems in the field of econometrics. Although we do not disregard the capabilities of ANNs, we do not view them as ripe for use by econometricians in an as intuitive and statistically- grounded manner as many other machine learning techniques.  Table 12: The share of the predictions of an   artificial neural network (ANN)   that are within 5 %, 10 % and 20 % of the correct value and the median absolute percentage error (MdAPE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE). Also, our AVM (for comparison) - out-of-sample performance for Q1 2018. Within 5 %   Within 10 %   Within 20 %   MdAPE   MAPE AVM   46.89 %   76.36 %   96.31 %   5.36 %   7.17 % ANN   24.20 %   46.18 %   77.30 %   10.96 %   13.99 % Table 13: The hyperparameters of our artificial neural network (ANN) - descriptions and selected values.  Variable   Description   Selected Value Optimiser   The solver used for weight-optimisation   Adam 1  Activation function   The activation function used in the neurons   ReLU 2  # of hidden layers   The number of layers   4  Hidden layers   The number of nodes per layer   [64,64,32,32]  Maximum number of iterations   The maximum number of iterations of the training data   1 000  Learning rate   The step-size used in updating the weights   0.01  Alpha   A regularisation parameter, to prevent overfitting the data   0.0001 1) See Kingma and Ba (2014). 2) See Glorot et al. (2011).  A. A PPENDIX   31

---

A.2   D ECISION   T REES FOR THE   XGB OOST -M ETHOD  The XGBoost-method produces several binary decision trees, which are grown sequentially to improve on the previous tree’s residual, as described in Chapter 4.2. Below we present an example of the three first trees grown for a randomly selected dwelling 33 . The attribute names are given as   f0 ,   f1 , . . . due to the nature of our selected graphing tool. We note a few of the important attributes;   f0   is the longitude,   f1   is the latitude,   f2   is the usable square meters,   f4   is the number of rooms,   f6   is the days since sale,   f7   is the build year,   f8   is the common debt.  (a) Tree #1 of 1000  (b) Tree #2 of 1000  (c) Tree #3 of 1000  Figure 11: The first three decision trees grown for an instance of the XGBoost-method.  33 A three-room, cooperative, apartment in the district of Østensjø.  A. A PPENDIX   32

---

A.3   M ETHODOLOGICAL AND   I MPLEMENTATION   D ETAILS OF THE   R EPEAT   S ALES   M ETHOD  In this appendix we give a succinct presentation of the repeat sales method (RSM) which we introduced in Chapter 4. The RSM is implemented as developed by Case and Shiller (1987).   We also present the rationale and procedure for applying   index smoothing   to our indices. The RSM is implemented using a three-step regression. We first run a model-specific pre-processing, as noted and justified in Chapter 3. We treat multiple resales as indepen- dent observations, a practice recommended in the literature (See Shiller, 1991).   Finally, dwellings which have been sold more than once are grouped in their corresponding dis- trict, as the indices are calculated for each unique district   34 . We then run the procedure given below  P ROCEDURE   A.1: The Case Shiller repeat sales method method  1) In the first stage, the natural logarithm of the price difference of the sales in a given district is regressed on a set of indicator variables, one for each time period in the sample except the first.   For each observation, the indicator variables are zero in every quarter except the quarters in which the two sales occurred. For the quarter of the first sale, the dummy variable is -1, and for the quarter of the next sale, the dummy variable is 1. 2) The residuals from the regression in the first stage are then squared and regressed on a constant term and the time between sales 35  3) In the third stage, a weighted least squares (WLS) regression is run sim- ilarly to that of the stage one regression, weighted with the reciprocal of the square root of the fitted values in the second stage. After running the above three-step regression on the transaction data, we obtain a WLS estimation. The exponential function is applied to the coefficients of the final estimation to produce an index. This index can then be used to adjust a previously sold dwelling’s previous sold price to the last observed index observation, to predict today’s selling price. Note that the RSM can produce multiple estimates for dwellings with numerous repeat sales. In that case, we average the estimates. After the application of the RSM as described above, we use an index smoothing step, which we describe next.  Index Smoothing  When developing indices one needs to determine the geographical and temporal granular- ity of each point in the index 36 . The econometrician is tasked with determining the optimal grouping of observations, such as to allot sufficient data in each group and to let each group contain adequately similar data. On the one hand, one seeks to allot sufficient data for each time period in each index. On the other hand, the indices should have sufficient geographi- cal homogeneity and adequate temporal granularity. In our case, we considered the choice between creating a single monthly index for Oslo and creating quarterly indices for each district. Based on industry expertise we have opted to create   smoothed quarterly indices   for  34 We also produce an index for all of Oslo, for use in the index smoothing process described in below.  35 This stage is used to create weights for the WLS. Two prominent alternatives for creating real estate indices by Bailey et al. (1963) and Calhoun (1996) vary merely in their assumptions of the heteroscedasticity of this regression stage. The former assumes no heteroscedasticity, while the latter assumes non-linear heteroscedasticity, and thus includes a term with time squared.  36 For example, one may consider one index based on transactions grouped per week, created for each street in Norway, and another index grouped per year, created for all of Norway. It should be clear to the reader that the former would not allocate sufficient data for each point in the index, while the latter would group too much data in each index. Both would be unwise choices.  A. A PPENDIX   33

---

each district. That is, we smooth the indices with an aggregated Oslo-index by averaging the quarterly observations.   This is done due to the sparsity of our dataset, particularly prevalent for the older data, as shown in Appendix A.5. The individual districts’ indices, the index for Oslo and the smoothed indices are found in Appendix A.4. A. A PPENDIX   34

---

A.4   P LOTS OF THE   R EAL   E STATE   I NDICES BY THE   R EPEAT   S ALES   M ETHOD  (a) Aggregated index for Oslo  (b) Indices for each district  (c) Smoothed indices for each district  Figure 12: Real Estate Price Indices for Oslo from Q2 1991 to Q1 2018, we apply version (c) in our AVM.  A. A PPENDIX   35

---

A.5   N UMBER OF   T RANSACTIONS   P ER   D ISTRICT AND   Q UARTER IN   O SLO  Table 14: Number of transactions recorded per district and per quarter, between 2 nd   quarter 1993 and 1 st   quarter 2018. Alna   Bjerke   Frogner   Gamle Oslo   Grorud   Grünerløkka   Nordre Aker   Nordstrand   Sagene   St. Hanshaugen   Stovner   Søndre Nordstrand   Ullern   Vestre Aker   Østensjø   Oslo 1991Q2   22   27   230   135   6   55   32   33   35   79   31   20   69   69   47   890 1991Q3   21   29   186   86   7   67   65   49   33   125   30   32   57   99   33   919 1991Q4   26   39   258   142   17   76   44   58   44   110   41   58   92   121   52   1178 1992Q1   17   33   188   73   7   51   26   41   22   64   22   70   60   114   25   813 1992Q2   22   17   158   129   6   54   35   35   30   51   22   57   72   89   18   795 1992Q3   25   22   170   99   9   48   26   40   20   90   32   23   78   82   41   805 1992Q4   17   39   186   140   12   95   54   50   18   97   38   42   76   80   36   980 1993Q1   19   19   175   150   4   48   25   39   28   73   15   23   39   76   30   763 1993Q2   23   26   217   83   8   40   37   37   23   81   25   17   78   72   30   797 1993Q3   36   37   248   80   11   80   53   65   49   115   42   48   72   114   35   1085 1993Q4   72   35   360   90   18   106   70   78   60   158   50   50   103   135   37   1422 1994Q1   25   26   205   108   6   75   49   42   39   87   39   27   64   88   38   918 1994Q2   48   49   257   163   18   86   46   66   60   116   47   76   97   103   46   1278 1994Q3   36   57   369   116   17   92   92   131   48   191   51   67   121   122   51   1561 1994Q4   44   51   359   113   19   152   74   119   59   188   56   68   107   143   77   1629 1995Q1   30   44   243   75   12   93   57   67   61   120   92   68   146   104   45   1257 1995Q2   63   53   299   85   16   90   48   88   44   159   73   90   126   114   51   1399 1995Q3   60   57   369   96   27   131   91   92   91   189   72   138   190   140   90   1833 1995Q4   79   80   397   148   15   148   101   108   70   197   86   134   191   199   78   2031 1996Q1   50   39   338   126   9   95   63   68   71   126   34   70   91   130   46   1356 1996Q2   56   68   387   126   39   94   75   80   94   204   73   101   135   131   65   1728 1996Q3   70   104   440   150   24   136   79   99   89   225   69   105   127   163   85   1965 1996Q4   45   90   486   194   16   166   76   137   106   233   92   81   143   197   92   2154 1997Q1   34   72   378   129   24   146   74   66   68   157   44   83   103   166   78   1622 1997Q2   52   85   419   194   19   156   64   101   86   245   81   84   132   145   70   1933 1997Q3   74   100   486   207   70   250   119   142   100   263   98   147   155   168   118   2497 1997Q4   73   117   561   219   53   215   101   111   87   224   77   169   178   222   92   2499 1998Q1   55   62   350   172   25   154   61   82   55   127   56   112   104   150   76   1641 1998Q2   53   92   421   169   28   176   67   101   88   223   63   132   131   181   52   1977 1998Q3   79   74   533   178   30   213   118   136   128   249   96   162   185   206   96   2483 1998Q4   62   89   446   162   26   161   136   135   112   194   90   99   105   169   71   2057 1999Q1   47   71   319   112   20   142   91   116   60   156   64   112   96   139   76   1621 1999Q2   41   73   445   132   29   141   89   124   87   208   67   150   145   131   83   1945 1999Q3   89   110   521   188   22   210   126   162   105   263   103   145   157   170   125   2496 1999Q4   76   103   611   195   39   241   111   136   128   235   109   153   199   181   126   2643 2000Q1   47   62   420   128   25   186   77   135   94   162   64   87   110   123   45   1765 2000Q2   66   83   444   168   17   212   93   113   98   210   95   102   141   162   73   2077 2000Q3   77   106   494   189   46   217   109   197   146   236   101   144   139   165   94   2460 2000Q4   79   119   565   169   48   214   188   160   131   288   152   170   134   222   138   2777 2001Q1   41   72   381   115   23   154   91   85   109   162   79   137   131   121   71   1772 2001Q2   44   113   485   173   26   158   147   93   120   252   86   149   147   143   85   2221 2001Q3   91   106   625   220   42   256   136   170   94   338   118   180   176   205   132   2889 2001Q4   85   152   515   237   41   178   142   140   149   296   110   137   182   185   110   2659 2002Q1   57   102   469   198   25   192   75   120   120   203   78   94   149   141   70   2093 2002Q2   78   114   606   163   34   202   136   132   126   307   108   181   156   197   111   2651 2002Q3   81   97   537   237   43   213   136   147   173   279   84   125   160   180   111   2603 2002Q4   95   109   617   203   44   232   171   181   126   291   112   135   196   194   161   2867 2003Q1   49   59   414   177   16   154   84   117   151   345   74   130   116   146   56   2088 2003Q2   57   144   529   152   30   285   112   181   150   342   100   97   133   175   90   2577 2003Q3   67   147   560   211   38   319   128   160   129   343   110   135   155   185   121   2808 2003Q4   108   147   782   254   55   457   149   202   142   374   151   174   212   230   128   3565 2004Q1   67   81   619   235   33   269   101   129   146   298   88   111   158   170   74   2579 2004Q2   75   98   635   203   42   348   120   141   198   352   93   133   175   193   122   2928 2004Q3   78   103   641   226   32   333   167   164   193   358   110   137   185   179   84   2990 2004Q4   86   86   687   253   42   282   156   197   217   331   94   122   186   238   99   3076 2005Q1   88   143   516   153   34   253   116   124   146   249   71   97   129   145   62   2326 2005Q2   84   110   584   231   38   313   143   156   178   318   98   103   171   180   94   2801 2005Q3   98   119   714   317   47   344   155   160   243   357   117   149   189   213   136   3358 2005Q4   68   173   777   245   31   441   162   173   262   340   107   142   270   309   132   3632 2006Q1   56   99   563   182   28   369   144   134   188   288   85   88   145   157   101   2627 2006Q2   90   117   696   299   56   421   118   147   182   405   93   113   345   177   98   3357 2006Q3   68   128   670   283   34   442   238   149   240   463   141   114   230   223   108   3531 2006Q4   63   141   755   293   39   361   349   178   222   396   95   120   171   248   118   3549 2007Q1   77   156   549   184   24   232   186   126   152   343   92   103   138   136   78   2576 2007Q2   76   120   553   350   36   318   212   119   216   327   107   119   214   156   108   3031 2007Q3   97   131   634   321   45   371   241   159   249   430   124   167   192   224   108   3493 2007Q4   74   145   727   338   34   366   201   172   216   405   98   132   198   249   95   3450 2008Q1   74   83   477   243   28   321   213   121   153   283   73   150   159   183   92   2653 2008Q2   70   95   539   247   31   393   189   163   275   409   102   103   275   239   76   3206 2008Q3   60   155   540   264   38   382   189   176   207   292   86   136   190   183   96   2994 2008Q4   47   97   461   232   24   301   157   125   121   296   64   83   175   128   58   2369 2009Q1   29   60   389   162   25   187   125   79   116   174   42   57   115   134   50   1744 2009Q2   40   86   479   235   25   328   185   153   277   257   50   86   166   172   81   2620 2009Q3   41   164   606   268   34   372   248   141   268   339   61   98   200   215   89   3144 2009Q4   65   119   630   236   31   374   203   165   262   313   67   92   185   222   91   3055 2010Q1   40   87   493   215   22   248   131   143   200   244   58   79   141   165   80   2346 2010Q2   64   100   563   216   25   378   143   135   257   282   68   82   163   150   75   2701 2010Q3   64   129   686   309   40   383   230   121   302   417   81   93   245   246   102   3448 2010Q4   71   113   714   244   27   440   174   147   253   336   97   90   230   238   92   3266 2011Q1   46   102   508   184   17   310   102   152   199   255   39   71   126   154   71   2336 2011Q2   79   110   615   250   27   324   149   162   216   332   58   104   165   176   101   2868 2011Q3   68   145   685   289   35   461   205   162   304   398   115   114   205   175   98   3459 2011Q4   54   123   740   295   47   413   236   192   212   329   78   113   234   229   79   3374 2012Q1   53   100   536   224   24   278   145   116   164   246   58   89   131   178   57   2399 2012Q2   63   90   533   296   42   330   174   144   215   251   60   111   173   211   82   2775 2012Q3   66   107   585   338   47   433   192   145   328   358   73   117   202   221   103   3315 2012Q4   71   126   569   264   25   427   182   166   232   286   78   73   156   209   95   2959 2013Q1   41   108   409   265   43   314   136   111   180   213   95   79   137   150   80   2361 2013Q2   50   76   465   193   39   324   130   127   341   246   55   97   174   182   65   2564 2013Q3   64   102   567   268   23   338   196   147   361   287   68   138   196   210   137   3102 2013Q4   42   109   473   253   33   401   172   156   214   272   65   71   143   148   90   2642 2014Q1   40   62   372   179   19   250   94   108   134   163   45   85   106   134   56   1847 2014Q2   54   82   478   215   20   367   137   151   250   222   62   142   157   145   75   2557 2014Q3   58   93   565   268   30   393   141   128   272   297   69   96   180   190   94   2874 2014Q4   66   96   509   259   30   372   123   156   250   292   46   86   176   193   73   2727 2015Q1   41   71   435   162   20   280   77   121   167   202   49   81   134   137   62   2039 2015Q2   56   73   519   240   18   314   119   106   237   245   49   77   150   177   75   2455 2015Q3   59   81   555   252   26   319   156   120   302   277   74   94   135   206   67   2723 2015Q4   43   77   484   254   21   302   130   150   212   228   66   90   142   186   74   2459 2016Q1   40   58   333   137   16   204   103   88   127   152   39   72   115   121   41   1646 2016Q2   56   85   403   185   18   286   109   94   166   205   51   75   125   126   70   2054 2016Q3   65   119   540   258   42   408   169   156   330   301   84   70   181   219   92   3034 2016Q4   64   119   644   226   42   380   216   195   240   272   108   89   213   259   80   3147 2017Q1   78   121   572   266   49   395   186   205   266   289   98   65   234   251   120   3195 2017Q2   72   146   522   286   39   427   204   215   308   282   78   80   200   286   139   3284 2017Q3   76   115   436   242   21   339   185   170   264   237   78   73   174   181   88   2679 2017Q4   53   114   404   242   35   319   150   156   232   248   73   52   151   178   92   2499 2018Q1   19   43   133   90   13   116   54   52   76   74   28   31   54   51   42   876  A. A PPENDIX   36

---

A.6   I MPLEMENTATION   O VERVIEW  Here we provide a brief overview of the implementation of the AVM, with an emphasis on the choices related to the programming details, external dependencies and hardware. Our stacked AVM is implemented in full in   Python . The implementation is carried out with the aim of producing many estimates in parallel, to be able to quickly create value estimates for all dwellings in a given month, and therefore not optimised to create single estimates quickly. We make use of   mpi4py 37 , a standardised API for parallel computing, to divide the estimates into a given number of parallel cores, all running one instance of the AVM. To fully exploit the capabilities this provides, we run the implementation on a HP bl685c G7 server computer, employing four 2.2GHz AMD Opteron 6274 CPUs, each with 16 logical cores. We rely on two different libraries for the individual methods;   SKlearn   and   XGBoost . SKlearn is a large library, consisting of packages for many commonplace statistical meth- ods. Amongst these we use: i)   BaggingRegressor   - Contains all required methods for the bagging predictor algo- rithm ii)   RandomForestRegressor   - Contains all required methods for the random forest algo- rithm iii)   ExtraTreeRegressor   - Contains all required methods for the extra trees algorithm iv)   GridSearchCV   - Contains the cross validation algorithm to search for hyperparame- ters The XGBoost library is provided by an open source community, and it contains all the necessary methods to both tune and run the XGBoost-algorithm.  Training Time for the Individual Algorithms  The combined training time for one value estimate is, as mentioned in Chapter 5.5, about 400 seconds, given one core and the hardware-specifications above. Table 15 illustrate the training times for the individual algorithms.  Table 15: The average training times for the individual algorithms, given 10 000 comparable transactions and no parallelising of the submodels. Ensemble Learning BP   RF   ET   XGB Average Training Time   177.1 s   42.4 s   31.5 s   131.3 s  We note that this can be significantly optimised by parallelising the individual methods, if the goal is to create   one   quick value estimate.  37 See   http://mpi4py.readthedocs.io/en/stable/   for an overview of this package.  A. A PPENDIX   37

---

A.7   S TACKED   G ENERALISATION   - P YTHON   C ODE FOR   P ROCEDURE   2 Here we present the Python code used to implement steps 3-5 in Procedure 2 38 .  1   class   Ensemble(object):  2   def   __init__(self, n_splits,   stacker,   base_models):  3   self.n_splits   =   n_splits  4   self.stacker   =   stacker  5   self.base_models   =   base_models  6 7   def   fit_predict(self,   X,   y,   T,   comp_transer,   test_unit):  8   X   =   np.array(X)  9   y   =   np.array(y)  10   T   =   np.array(T)  11 12   folds   =   list(KFold(n_splits=self.n_splits, shuffle=True).split(X,   y))  13   S_train   =   np.zeros((X.shape[0],   len(self.base_models)))  14   S_test   =   np.zeros((T.shape[0],   len(self.base_models)))  15 16   for   i,   clf   in   enumerate(self.base_models):  17   S_test_i   =   np.zeros((T.shape[0],   self.n_splits))  18 19   for   j,   (train_idx,   test_idx)   in   enumerate(folds):  20   X_train   =   X[train_idx]  21   y_train   =   y[train_idx]  22   X_holdout   =   X[test_idx]  23   y_holdout   =   y[test_idx]  24 25   clf.fit(X_train,   y_train)  26   y_pred   =   clf.predict(X_holdout)[:]  27 28   S_train[test_idx,   i]   =   y_pred  29 30   predictions   =   clf.predict(T)[:]  31   S_test_i[:,   j]   =   predictions  32   S_test[:,   i]   =   S_test_i.mean(axis=1)  33 34   if   run_RS:  35   rs_train_pred   =   []  36   for   id,   unit   in   comp_transer.iterrows():  37   rs_train_pred.append(list(prepred_rs_dict[id].values()))  38 39   rs_test_pred   = [list(prepred_rs_dict[test_unit.name].values())]  40   S_train   =   np.concatenate((S_train,   rs_train_pred),   axis=1)  41   S_test   =   np.concatenate((S_test,   rs_test_pred),   axis=1)  42   x_and_s_train   =   np.concatenate((S_train,   X),   axis=1)  43   x_and_s_test   =   np.concatenate((S_test,   T),   axis=1)  44 45   self.stacker.fit(x_and_s_train,   y)  46   stack_ppsm   =   self.stacker.predict(x_and_s_test)[:]  47 48   return   stack_ppsm,   S_test  38 This   code   is   inspired   by   the   following   Kernel:   https://www.kaggle.com/serigne/stacked -regressions-top-4-on-leaderboard/notebook . Retrieved February 27 th   2018  A. A PPENDIX   38

---

R EFERENCES  Abraham, J. M., & Schauman, W. S. (1991). New Evidence on Home Prices from Freddie Mac Repeat Sales.   Real Estate Economics ,   3 , 333–352. Retrieved from   http://dx.doi .org/10.1111/1540-6229.00556  Adam-Bourdarios, C., Cowan, G., Germain, C., & Guyon, I.   (2015).   The Higgs bo- son machine learning challenge.   NIPS Workshop on High-energy Physics and Machine Learning , 19–55. Retrieved from   http://www.jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/ v42/cowa14.pdf   doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/664/7/072015 Adams, Z., & Füss, R.   (2010).   Macroeconomic determinants of international hous- ing markets.   Journal of Housing Economics ,   19 (1), 38–50.   Retrieved from   http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhe.2009.10.005   doi: 10.1016/j.jhe.2009.10.005 Allison, P. D. (2001).   Missing Data . SAGE Publications. Retrieved from   https://books .google.no/books?id=LJB2AwAAQBAJ  Alves, A. (2017). Stacking machine learning classifiers to identify Higgs bosons at the LHC.  Journal of Instrumentation ,   12 (05), T05005. Bailey, M. J., Muth, R. F., & Nourse, H. O.   (1963).   A Regression Method for Real Estate Price Index Construction. ,   58 (304), 933–942. Balk, B., De Haan, J., & Diewert, E. (2011).   Handbook on Residential Property Prices Indices (RPPIs)   (No.   November   2009).   Retrieved   from   http://scholar.google .com/scholar?hl=en{&}btnG=Search{&}q=intitle:Handbook+on+ Residential+Property+Prices+Indices+(+RPPIs+){#}1{%}5Cnhttp:// scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en{&}btnG=Search{&}q=intitle: Handbook+on+Residential+Property+Prices+(RPPIs){%}230   doi: 10.2785/34007 Bengio, Y. (2012). Practical Recommendations for Gradient-Based Training of Deep Archi- tectures. In G. Montavon, G. B. Orr, & K.-R. Müller (Eds.),   Neural networks: Tricks of the trade: Second edition   (pp. 437–478). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Retrieved from   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8{_}26   doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_26 Bharti, S. K., & Babu, K. S. (2017). Automatic Keyword Extraction for Text Summarization: A Survey.   arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03242 (April). doi: 10.1145/2980258.2980442 Bishop, C. M. (2006).   Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statis- tics)   (Vol. 4) (No. 356). Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. Retrieved from   http://www.library.wisc.edu/selectedtocs/bg0137.pdf   doi: 10 .1641/B580519 Boligmani.   (2015).   Selveier   og   andelsleilighet.   Retrieved   2018-04-01,   from  http://www.boligmani.no/aktuelt/boligmarkedet/selveier-og -andelsleilighet-fordelene-og-ulempene-du-bor-kjenne-til/6779  Bonnet, O. (2012). Hedonic prices in the Paris housing market and an analysis of the will- ingness to pay for a high-income neighborhood.   Institut detudes politiques de Paris . Re- trieved from   http://econ.sciences-po.fr/sites/default/files/file/ Odran{_}Bonnet{_}Master{_}dissertation.pdf  Breiman,   L.   (1996a).   Bagging predictors.   Machine Learning ,   24 (2),   123–140.   Re- trieved from   http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00058655   doi:   10 .1007/BF00058655 Breiman,   L.   (1996b).   Stacked regressions.   Machine Learning ,   24 (1),   49–64.   Re- trieved from   http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00117832   doi:   10 .1007/BF00117832 Breiman, L.   (2001).   Random forests.   Machine Learning ,   45 (1), 5–32.   doi:   10.1023/A: R EFERENCES   39

---

1010933404324 Calhoun, C. A. (1996). OFHEO house price indexes: HPI technical description.   Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight ,   20552 (March), 1–15. Campos, R., Canuto, S., Salles, T., de Sá, C. C., & Gonçalves, M. A.   (2017).   Stack- ing Bagged and Boosted Forests for Effective Automated Classification.   Proceed- ings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval - SIGIR ’17 , 105–114.   Retrieved from   http://dl.acm.org/ citation.cfm?doid=3077136.3080815   doi: 10.1145/3077136.3080815 Case, K., & Shiller, R. (1987). Prices of Single Family Homes Since 1970: New Indexes for Four Cities. (September). Retrieved from   http://www.nber.org/papers/w2393 .pdf   doi: 10.3386/w2393 Chen,   T.,   &   Guestrin,   C.   (2016).   XGBoost:   A   Scalable   Tree   Boosting   Sys- tem.   Retrieved from   http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.02754{%}0Ahttp://dx .doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785   doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939785 Chen, T., & Guestrin, C.   (2018).   Understand your dataset with XGBoost — xgboost 0.71 documentation.   Retrieved 2018-05-22, from   http://xgboost.readthedocs.io/ en/latest/R-package/discoverYourData.html{#}creation-of-new -features-based-on-old-ones  Cochrane, J. H. (2009).   Asset Pricing:(Revised Edition) . Princeton university press. Cybenko, G. (1989). Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function.   Mathematics of Control, Signals and Systems ,   2 (4), 303–314.   Retrieved from   https://doi.org/ 10.1007/BF02551274   doi: 10.1007/BF02551274 DMLC.   (2016).   Notes on Parameter Tuning - xgboost 0.71 documentation.   Retrieved 2018-04-24, from   http://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how{_}to/ param{_}tuning.html  Downie, M. L., & Robson, G.   (2007).   Automated Valuation Models : an international perspective.   RICS Automated Valuation Models Conference:AVMs Today and Tomor- row (November), 1–78. E24.   (2014).   E24: Boligduellen.   Retrieved 2017-12-10, from   https://e24.no/privat/ eiendom/boligduellen-selveier-eller-andelsbolig/23281342  Eiendomsverdi.   (n.d.).   Eiendomsverdi AS.   Retrieved 2018-01-30,   from   https:// eiendomsverdi.no/  Eurostat. (2015).   Distribution of population by tenure status, type of household and income group.  Retrieved 2017-12-17, from   https://tinyurl.com/y8yodafw  Freund, Y., & Schapire, R. E. (1995). A desicion-theoretic generalization of on-line learn- ing and an application to boosting. ,   139 , 23–37.   Retrieved from   http://link .springer.com/10.1007/3-540-59119-2{_}166   doi: 10.1007/3-540-59119-2 _166 Freund,   Y.,   &   Schapire,   R.   E.   (1996).   A   Decision-Theoretic   Generalization of   On-Line   Learning   and   an   Application   to   Boosting*.   journal   of   com- puter   and   system   sciences ,   55 .   Retrieved   from   https://ac.els-cdn .com/S002200009791504X/1-s2.0-S002200009791504X-main.pdf ?{_}tid=a3d0cfd7-6278-40ef-98e2-9649c97e1c64{&}acdnat= 1526896094{_}abe3abc903521693dbdcc430990cf3ca  Friedman, J., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2001).   The elements of statistical learning   (Vol. 1). Springer series in statistics New York. Friedman, J. H. . (2001). Greedy Function Approximation : A Gradient Boosting Machine.  The Annals of Statistics ,   29 (5), 1189–1232. doi: 10.1214/009053606000001389 Geurts, P., Ernst, D., & Wehenkel, L. (2006). Extremely randomized trees.   Machine Learning ,  63 (1), 3–42. doi: 10.1007/s10994-006-6226-1 Glorot, X., & Bengio, Y. (2010). Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward R EFERENCES   40

---

neural networks.   Pmlr ,   9 , 249–256.   Retrieved from   http://machinelearning .wustl.edu/mlpapers/paper{_}files/AISTATS2010{_}GlorotB10.pdf  doi: 10.1.1.207.2059 Glorot, X., Bordes, A., & Bengio, Y. (2011). Deep sparse rectifier neural networks.   AISTATS ’11: Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,  15 , 315–323. doi: 10.1.1.208.6449 Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A.   (2016).   Deep Learning.   Nature ,   521 (7553), 800.   Retrieved from   http://goodfeli.github.io/dlbook/{%}0Ahttp:// dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14539   doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3707 Graczyk, M., Lasota, T., Trawi ´ nski, B., & Trawi ´ nski, K.   (2010).   Comparison of Bagging, Boosting and Stacking Ensembles Applied to Real Estate Appraisal. In N. T. Nguyen, M. T. Le, & J. ´ Swi \ katek (Eds.),   Intelligent information and database systems   (pp. 340– 350). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Hariharakrishnan, J., Mohanavalli, S., Srividya, & Sundhara Kumar, K. B. (2017). Survey of pre-processing techniques for mining big data.   International Conference on Computer, Communication, and Signal Processing: Special Focus on IoT, ICCCSP 2017 . doi: 10.1109/ ICCCSP.2017.7944072 Harris, J. C. (1989). The Effect of Real Rates of Interest on Housing Prices.   Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics ,   2 , 47–60.   Retrieved from   https://link.springer .com/content/pdf/10.1007{%}2FBF00161716.pdf  Hauck, T.   (2014).   scikit-learn cookbook   (2nd ed.).   Packt Publ.   Retrieved from   http:// cds.cern.ch/record/1975064  Ibbotson, R. G., & Siegel, L. B. (1984). Real estate returns: a comparison with other invest- ments.   Real Estate Economics ,   12 (3), 219–242. Inoue, A., & Kilian, L.   (2008).   How Useful Is Bagging in Forecasting Economic Time Series?   A Case Study of U.S. Consumer Price Inflation.   Journal of the American Statistical Association ,   103 , 482–511.   Retrieved from   http://www.tandfonline .com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uasa20   doi:   10.1198/ 016214507000000473doi.org/10.1198/016214507000000473 Jansen, S. J., De Vries, P., Coolen, H. C., Lamain, C. J., & Boelhouwer, P. J. (2008). Developing a house price index for the Netherlands: A practical application of weighted repeat sales.   Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics ,   37 (2), 163–186. doi: 10.1007/s11146 -007-9068-0 Kaggle.   (2018).   Kaggle | Zillow Prize:   Zillow’s Home Value Prediction (Zestimate) - Ker- nels.   Retrieved 2018-05-01, from   https://www.kaggle.com/c/zillow-prize -1/kernels  Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A.   (1972).   Subjective probability:   A judgment of rep- resentativeness.   Cognitive Psychology ,   3 (3), 430–454.   Retrieved from   http:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0010028572900163   doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(72)90016-3 Ke,   G.,   Meng,   Q.,   Finley,   T.,   Wang,   T.,   Chen,   W.,   Ma,   W.,   . . .   Liu,   T.-Y. (2017).   LightGBM: A Highly Efficient Gradient Boosting Decision Tree.   Re- trieved   from   https://papers.nips.cc/paper/6907-lightgbm-a-highly -efficient-gradient-boosting-decision-tree.pdf  Kettunen, P.   (2012).   FI – Finland   (Tech. Rep.).   Statistics Finland.   Retrieved 2018-05-02, from   https://www.dallasfed.org/{~}/media/documents/institute/ houseprice/finland.pdf  Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.   arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 . Levin, J. (2001). Information and the Market for Lemons.   The RAND Journal of Economics ,  32 (4), 657. Retrieved from   http://doi.wiley.com/10.2307/2696386   doi: 10 R EFERENCES   41

---

.2307/2696386 Lior, R., & Others. (2014).   Data mining with decision trees: theory and applications   (Vol. 81). World scientific. Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation.   (2009).   Til deg som vurderer å kjøpe en andel i borettslag med høy fellesgjeld   (Tech. Rep.).   Kommunaldepartementet.   Re- trieved 2018-05-25, from   https://www.husbanken.no/-/media/Boligjuss/ Kjoper{_}web.ashx?la=no  Moore, J. W., & Myers, J.   (2010).   Using geographic-attribute weighted regression for CAMA modelling.   Journal of Property Tax Assessment and . . .   ,   7 (3), 5–28.   Retrieved from   http://library.iaao.org/fulltext/pa1003005.pdf  Mullainathan, S., & Spiess, J.   (2017).   Machine Learning: An Applied Econometric Ap- proach.   Journal of Economic Perspectives ,   31 (2), 87–106.   Retrieved from   http:// pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/jep.31.2.87   doi: 10.1257/jep.31.2.87 Nielsen, D.   (2016).   Tree Boosting With XGBoost: Why Does XGBoost Win "Every" Ma- chine Learning Competition?   NTNU Tech Report (December), 2016. Retrieved 2018- 05-27, from   https://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/ 2433761/16128{_}FULLTEXT.pdf?sequence=1{&}isAllowed=y  Nielsen, M. A. (2015).   Neural Networks and Deep Learning . Determination Press. Retrieved from   http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap5.html  Northcraft, G. B., & Neale, M. A.   (1987).   Experts, amateurs, and real estate:   An anchoring-and-adjustment perspective on property pricing decisions.   Organiza- tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes ,   39 (1), 84–97. Retrieved from   http:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/074959788790046X   doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(87)90046-X NS3457.   (2013).   NS3457   Standard.   Retrieved   2018-05-28,   from   https:// www.standard.no/nyheter/nyhetsarkiv/bygg-anlegg-og-eiendom/ 2014/ny-tabell-for-bygningstyper---ns-3457-3/  Opitz, D., & Maclin, R. (1999). Popular Ensemble Methods: An Empirical Study.   Journal of Artificial Intelligent Research ,   11 , 169–198. Retrieved from   http://www.jair.org/ papers/paper614.html   doi: 10.1613/jair.614 Pattichis, C. S.   (1999).   Computer Assisted Valuation : Multiple Regression Analysis in Cyprus. (January 1999). Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., . . . Duches- nay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.   Journal of Machine Learning Research ,   12 , 2825–2830. Rattermann,   M.   (2007).   Valuation   by   Comparison:   Residential   Analysis   &   Logic . Appraisal Institute.   Retrieved from   https://books.google.no/books?id= 6n{_}pQN2noAQC  Rosen, S.   (1974).   Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition.   Journal of Political Economy ,   82 (1), 34–55. Retrieved from   http://www .journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/260169   doi: 10.1086/260169 Schapire, R. E.   (1989).   The Strength of Weak Learnability (Extended Abstract).   Ma- chine learning ,   227 (October), 28–33. Retrieved from   http://link.springer.com/ article/10.1007/BF00116037  Schapire, R. E.   (2013).   Explaining AdaBoost.   Retrieved from   http://rob.schapire .net/papers/explaining-adaboost.pdf  Shiller, R. (1991). Arithmetic Repeat Sales Price Estimators.   Journal of Housing Economics ,  1 (1), 110–126. Sinnott, R. W. (1984). Virtues of the Haversine.   Sky Telesc. ,   68 , 159. Sittler, P.   (2017).   Digitalization in Real Estate.   In   24th annual european real estate society conference.   Delft, Netherlands.   Retrieved from   https://eres.architexturez  R EFERENCES   42

---

.net/doc/oai-eres-id-eres2017-128  Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1971). Comparison of Bayesian and regression approaches to the study of information processing in judgment.   Organizational Behavior and Human Performance ,   6 (6), 649–744.   Retrieved from   http://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/003050737190033X   doi:   https://doi.org/10.1016/ 0030-5073(71)90033-X Smith, P., & Tan, N. (2015). Bulletin December Quarter 2010. , 59–66. S&P Dow Jones Indices. (n.d.).   S&P CORELOGIC CASE-SHILLER HOME PRICE INDICES.  Retrieved 2017-12-14, from   http://us.spindices.com/index-family/real -estate/sp-corelogic-case-shiller  Statistics Norway.   (2010).   Befolkningsvekst rundt Oslo.   Retrieved 2018-05-23,   from  https://www.ssb.no/befolkning/artikler-og-publikasjoner/ befolkningsvekst-rundt-oslo  Statistics Norway. (2017). Price index for existing dwellings. , 7–11. Retrieved 2018-05-23, from   https://www.ssb.no/en/bpi/  Statistics Norway.   (2018a).   Population and population changes - quarterly.   Retrieved 2018-05-13,   from   https://www.ssb.no/en/befolkning/statistikker/ folkemengde/kvartal  Statistics Norway.   (2018b).   Prices per square metre of detached houses - SSB.   Retrieved 2018-05-23,   from   https://www.ssb.no/en/priser-og-prisindekser/ statistikker/kvadenebol  Sufi, A., & Mian, A. (2014).   House of Debt . The Norwegian Mapping Authority.   (2017).   Eiendomsinformasjon.   Retrieved 2017-12-17, from   https://www.kartverket.no/eiendom/eiendomsinformasjon/  Tsatsaronis, K., & Zhu, H.   (2004).   What drives housing price dynamics : cross-country evidence.   BIS Quarterly Review (March), 65–78. Walpole, R. E., Myers, R. H., Myers, S. L., & Ye, K. E.   (2016).   Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists .   Pearson Education Limited.   Retrieved from   https:// books.google.no/books?id=pP6SjwEACAAJ  Wheeler, D., Tiefelsdorf, M., Wheeler, D., & Tiefelsdorf, M. (2005). Multicollinearity and correlation among local regression coefficients in geographically weighted regres- sion.   J Geograph Syst ,   7 , 161–187. Retrieved from   https://link.springer.com/ content/pdf/10.1007{%}2Fs10109-005-0155-6.pdf   doi:   10.1007/s10109 -005-0155-6 Wolpert,   D.,   &   Macready,   W.   (1996).   Combining   stacking   with   bagging   to   im- prove   a   learning   algorithm.   Santa   Fe   Institute   Technical   Report ,   1–28.   Re- trieved from   http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10 .1.1.53.9933{&}rep=rep1{&}type=pdf  Wolpert, D. H. (1992). Stacked Generalization ( Stacking ). ,   5 , 241–259. Yandex.   (2018).   CatBoost - Parameter tuning - Yandex Technologies.   Retrieved 2018-04-24, from   https://tech.yandex.com/catboost/doc/dg/concepts/parameter -tuning-docpage/  Zillow. (2017).   How Accurate is Zillow’s Zestimate?   Retrieved 2017-12-13, from   https:// www.zillow.com/zestimate  R EFERENCES   43