NTNU  Norwegian University of Science and Technology Faculty of Economics and Management Department of Economics  Master’s thesis  Esten Melhuus  Volatility Modelling for the Norwegian Stock Market  Analysis and Forecasting of Conditional Variance using GARCH Models  Master’s thesis in Financial Economics Supervisor: Snorre Lindset February 2025

---

Esten Melhuus  Volatility Modelling for the Norwegian Stock Market  Analysis and Forecasting of Conditional Variance using GARCH Models  Master’s thesis in Financial Economics Supervisor: Snorre Lindset February 2025 Norwegian University of Science and Technology Faculty of Economics and Management Department of Economics

---

PREFACE  This masters thesis marks the end of my Master of Science degree in Financial Economics at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU). It has been written and submitted in the course   FIN3900 - Master’s Thesis in Financial Economics . The research problem in this thesis was determined and formulated by me, as it has been my wish to conduct a project that bridges financial econometrics and machine learning for quite some time.   This has been an incredibly challenging and interesting project, and conducting the research project has been a tremen- dous learning experience. I hope that you, as the reader, will find this thesis as interesting to read, as it was for me to write. I wish to thank my supervisor, Professor Snorre Lindset at NTNU. His knowl- edge and experience has been a tremendous help, and his guidance has been crucial for the success of this thesis. I also wish to thank Studentersamfundet i Trondhjem for lifelong friendships, a professional network, and personal growth that I could never have gained from my studies alone.   A special thanks goes out to UKA-21, Skringskomiteen, and Gjengutvalget, for making my time as a student the best period of my life, and helping me put my mind off finance in the weekends. Finally, I wish to thank my family for their support, especially my mother, fa- ther, and sister. This degree would not have been possible without their unending encouragement. Esten Melhuus Trondheim, February 2025.  “One can predict the course of a comet more easily than one can predict the course of Citigroup’s stock.   The attractiveness, of course, is that you can make more money successfully predicting a stock than you can a comet.”   - Jim Simons. i

---

ABSTRACT  Abstract  Understanding volatility is fundamental in financial economics, serving as a critical metric for risk assessment, derivatives pricing, and market sentiment analysis. The Oslo Børs Total Return Index (OBX), is characterized by a liquid equity market, and an illiquid options market.   This illiquidity limits the feasibility of estimating a VIX-like volatility index based on option prices for the OBX, using the same methods as for US indices. An alternative approach using econometric models based on equity returns is therefore preferable. This thesis details methods for forecasting the future 30-day conditional vari- ance of the OBX using GARCH models.   Using daily data spanning from 1999 to 2024, the thesis compares in total eight GARCH model variations: Univariate GARCH, EGARCH, FIGARCH, and GJR-GARCH models, in addition to multi- variate versions of the aforementioned models, known as GARCH-X models, which incorporate the VIX as an exogenous variable in the mean model. For model se- lection, Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) have been used, showing that models of order one are optimal for the OBX. K-folds cross-validation is performed for model validation, and to ensure statistical inference. For out of sample forecast evaluation, Mean Absolute Error (MAPE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) are used. The FIGARCH-VIX and GJR-GARCH-VIX have the highest performance, and show that capturing long-memory and the leverage effect in volatility cluster- ing, along with the inclusion of the VIX in GARCH models improves forecasting accuracy. The FIGARCH-VIX showed the highest performance overall, and the GJR-GARCH-VIX showed the highest accuracy for variance estimation in high- volatility periods. On the other hand, the GARCH and EGARCH models display the lowest performance, and do not seem to effectively capture the asymmetric properties of the volatility of the OBX as well as the other models. The VIX is also shown to be a statistically significant explanatory variable for the daily returns of the OBX. This thesis demonstrates how US market indicators, such as the VIX, can enhance forecasts in smaller, less liquid markets such as Norway.   It reaffirms the utility of GARCH models in modern financial modelling in achieving both interpretability and predictive power. ii

---

iii  Sammendrag  Å forstå volatilitet er avgjørende innen finansiell økonomi, da det er en grunn- leggende måleenhet for risikovurdering, prising av derivater og analyse av markedssen- timent. Oslo Børs Total Return Index (OBX) er preget av et likvid aksjemarked og et illikvid opsjonsmarked. Denne mangelen på likviditet begrenser muligheten til å estimere en VIX-lignende volatilitetsindeks basert på opsjonspriser for OBX, ved hjelp av samme metoder som for amerikanske aksjeindekser.   En alternativ tilnærming som benytter økonometriske modeller basert på aksjeavkastning er derfor å foretrekke. Denne oppgaven beskriver metoder for å predikere den fremtidige 30-dagers betingede variansen til OBX ved bruk av GARCH-modeller. Ved å bruke daglig data for aksjeavkastning fra 1999 til 2024, sammenlignes totalt åtte varianter av GARCH-modeller: Univariate GARCH, EGARCH, FIGARCH og GJR-GARCH- modeller, i tillegg til multivariate versjoner av de samme modellene, kjent som GARCH-X-modeller, som inkluderer VIX som en eksogen variabel i gjennom- snittsmodellene. For modellvalg har Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) og Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) blitt brukt, og de viser at førsteordens modeller er optimale for OBX. K-fold kryssvalidering utføres for modellvalidering og for å sikre statistisk inferens.   For evaluering av prediksjoner utenfor utvalget brukes Mean Absolute Error (MAPE) og Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). FIGARCH-VIX og GJR-GARCH-VIX viser høyest prestasjon og demonstrerer at å fange opp langtidseffekter og asymmetri i volatilitet, sammen med inkluderin- gen av VIX i GARCH-modeller, forbedrer prediksjonsnøyaktigheten. FIGARCH- VIX viste høyest prestasjon generelt, og GJR-GARCH-VIX viste størst nøyak- tighet for prediksjon av varians i perioder med høy volatilitet. På den andre siden har GARCH- og EGARCH-modellene den laveste prestasjonen og ser ikke ut til å effektivt fange opp de asymmetriske egenskapene til volatiliteten for OBX like bra som de andre modellene.   Man ser også at VIX er en statistisk signifikant forklaringsvariabel for den daglige avkastningen til OBX. Denne oppgaven demonstrerer hvordan amerikanske markedsindikatorer, som VIX, kan forbedre volatilitetsprognoser i mindre likvide markeder som Norge. Den bekrefter nytten av GARCH-modeller i moderne finansiell modellering ved å oppnå både tolkbarhet og prediksjonskraft.

---

CONTENTS  Preface   i Abstract   ii Contents   vi List of Figures   vii List of Tables   viii Abbreviations   ix 1   Introduction   1  1.1   Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 1.2   Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2 1.3   Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 1.4   Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3  2   Background & Theoretical Framework   5  2.1   The OBX   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5 2.2   Financial Time Series Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6 2.2.1   Volatility Clustering   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7 2.3   ARCH and GARCH Models   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 2.3.1   Parameter Constraints   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11 2.3.2   The Mean Model   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 2.3.3   Probability Distribution Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 2.3.4   Unit Root Test   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 2.3.5   Maximum Likelihood Estimation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14 2.4   GARCH Model Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15 2.4.1   EGARCH   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15 2.4.2   FIGARCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16 2.4.3   GJR-GARCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17 2.4.4   GARCH-X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17 2.5   VIX and Implied Volatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 iv

---

CONTENTS   v  3   Data & Methodology   21  3.1   Data Sources   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21 3.2   Considerations for Time Series Forecasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 3.2.1   Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24 3.2.2   Forecast Evaluation Metrics   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24 3.2.3   Model Validation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26 3.3   K-folds Cross-validation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27 3.4   Testing Empirical Relationships   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28 3.5   Coding the GARCH models   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29  4   Previous Literature   31  4.1   Hyytinen (1999) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31 4.2   Andersson (2020)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32 4.3   Wennström (2014)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32  5   Results & Discussion   33  5.1   ADF Statistics   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33 5.2   AIC & BIC Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33 5.3   Forecast Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35 5.4   Model Coefficients   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36  6   Conclusions   39  6.1   Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40  References   41 Appendices:   45 A - Plots of the Forecasts for each Model   46  A1   GARCH(1,1) Forecast Plot   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46 A2   EGARCH(1,1,1) Forecast Plot   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47 A3   FIGARCH(1,1) Forecast Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   48 A4   GJR-GARCH(1,1,1) Forecast Plot   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49 A5   GARCH-VIX(1,1) Forecast Plot   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50 A6   EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Forecast Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51 A7   FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) Forecast Plot   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52 A8   GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Forecast Plot   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53  B - Estimated Parameters for all Models   54  B1   GARCH(1,1) Estimated Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54 B1   EGARCH(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55 B3   FIGARCH(1,1) Estimated Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56 B4   GJR-GARCH(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57 B5   GARCH-VIX(1,1) Estimated Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58 B6   EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59

---

vi   CONTENTS  B7   FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) Estimated Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60 B8   GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters   . . . . . . . . . .   61  C - Use of Artificial Intelligence   62 D - Github Repository   63

---

LIST OF FIGURES  2.1.1 Historical prices OBX   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5 2.2.1 Returns OBX   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8 2.2.2 Volatility OBX   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8 2.2.3 PACF plot for returns and volatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 2.3.1 PACF plot for squared returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10 2.5.1 Historical levels VIX   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19 2.5.2 PACF plot VIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19 3.2.1 Expanding uncertainty in time series forecasting . . . . . . . . . . .   23 3.3.1 K-folds cross-validation outline   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28 A.1   GARCH(1,1) volatility forecast   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46 A.2   EGARCH(1,1,1) volatility forecast   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47 A.3   FIGARCH(1,1) volatility forecast   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   48 A.4   GJR-GARCH(1,1,1) volatility forecast   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49 A.5   GARCH-VIX(1,1) volatility forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50 A.6   EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1) volatility forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51 A.7   FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) volatility forecast   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52 A.8   GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) volatility forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53 B.1   GARCH(1,1) estimated parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54 B.2   EGARCH(1,1,1) estimated parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55 B.3   FIGARCH(1,1) estimated parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56 B.4   GJR-GARCH(1,1,1) estimated parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57 B.5   GARCH-VIX(1,1) estimated parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58 B.6   EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1) estimated parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59 B.7   FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) estimated parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60 B.8   GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) estimated parameters   . . . . . . . . . . .   61 vii

---

LIST OF TABLES  3.1.1 Descriptive statistics for OBX   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 5.1.1 ADF statistics for OBX and VIX   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33 5.2.1 AIC values for GARCH( p, q ) orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34 5.2.2 BIC values for GARCH( p, q ) orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34 5.3.1 Forecast results: Mean Absolute Percentage Error . . . . . . . . . .   36 5.3.2 Forecast results: Root Mean Square Error   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36 5.4.1 FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) estimated coefficients   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37 5.4.2 GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1) estimated coefficients   . . . . . . . . . . . .   37 C.1   AI tools used in this thesis and their purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62 viii

---

ABBREVIATIONS  List of all abbreviations in alphabetical order:  •   ADF:   Augmented Dickey Fuller  •   AIC:   Akaike Information Criterion  •   AR:   Autoregressive  •   ARCH:   Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity  •   ARMA:   Autoregressive Moving Average  •   BIC:   Bayesian Information Criterion  •   EGARCH:   Exponential Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedas- ticity  •   FIGARCH:   Fractionally Integrated Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity  •   FRED:   Federal Reserve Economic Data  •   GARCH:   Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity  •   GJR-GARCH:   Glosten-Jagannathan-Runkle-Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity  •   i.i.d.:   Independent and Identically Distributed  •   MAPE:   Mean Absolute Percentage Error  •   MLE:   Maximum Likelihood Estimation  •   MSE:   Mean Square Error  •   NTNU:   Norwegian University of Science and Technology  •   OBX:   Oslo Børs Total Return Index  •   OLS:   Ordinary Least Squares  •   RMSE:   Root Mean Square Error  •   S&P 500:   Standard & Poors 500  •   VIX:   Standard & Poors 500 Volatility Index ix

---

CHAPTER  ONE  INTRODUCTION  1.1   Motivation  Volatility is the principal metric for measuring risk in modern portfolio theory. By understanding how volatility behaves, we gain important insight into one of the main factors for the optimization of portfolio returns. Volatility is also a direct factor in the pricing of financial options. The Black- Scholes model, one of the foundational theories in finance, demonstrates that the price of options is highly sensitive to changes in the volatility of the underlying asset. Robust forecasts of market volatility can help option holders position them- selves to minimize risk, and to take positions which are rooted in empirical theory and analysis. Beyond its role in risk management and derivatives pricing, volatility is a key indicator of market sentiment and uncertainty. Periods of high volatility often correspond to market stress, economic instability, or significant geopolitical events, while low volatility might indicate stable market conditions. Correctly measuring volatility is therefore comparable with gauging the temperature of the economy, and forecasting it can give us insight into where it is heading. The obvious value associated with measuring market volatility has lead to the development of the volatility index VIX for US equities. Deriving its value from options prices, the index has gained widespread popularity due to its usefulness as a tool for equity analysis, and has become one of the major indices associated with the US stock market. Because of the lack of a liquid options market for the Norwegian stock market index OBX, a VIX-type index is much more challenging to estimate from a practical perspective. There is therefore an apparent need for practical volatility modelling for the OBX, based on a volatility measure which is not derived from options prices. Volatility can be forecasted using complex machine learning models such as neural networks. These types of extremely complex models have risen in popularity as modern finance has become increasingly quantitative. Consequently, the field of econometrics has a mixed reputation in quantitative finance, as certain machine learning advocates consider the field to be too simplistic to be effective. "Standard econometric models do not learn. It is hard to believe that something as complex 1

---

CHAPTER 1.   INTRODUCTION as 21st-century finance could be grasped by something as simple as inverting a covariance matrix" (De Prado, 2018, p. 15). These types of machine learning models are by many however, considered to be black boxes with limited opportunity for interpretation, or at the very lease opaque (Devansh, 2023).   Despite these models often being accurate in terms of estimations, using them limits our ability to draw insights from the models, and requires us to blindly trust the model output to a much higher degree. Classical econometric models on the other hand, are deeply rooted in financial theory, and do not output our forecasted independent variable exclusively. Rather, the models also produce equations in which we can observe the dependencies between different variables. This can give us tremendous insight into correlations in the data, increasing our understanding of financial markets. The GARCH model is one of the most important and widely used econometric models for modelling volatility, and many extensions of the original model have been introduced over the years. Comparing the performance of these extensions is therefore relevant. Assessing the models’ effectiveness for practical forecasting is also interesting, to see weather the theoretical properties of the models are consistent with real world market behaviour or not. Furthermore, there appears to be a separation between financial academia and industry professionals.   On the one hand, we sometimes see academics who do not practice what they teach. They describe theories with extremely elegant mathematics that do not always reflect real financial markets. On the other hand, we see industry professionals offering anecdotal advice with little to no root in financial theory or empirical proof. There is a need for models that are not only supported by empirical research and theory, but also display robust capabilities when it comes to practical financial modelling in real market conditions. The sign of a good financial model is therefore not only the ability to estimate forecasts with high accuracy, but it should also be consistent with academic literature, and rely on empirical research in its derivation.  1.2   Project Description  This thesis begins by examining the property of volatility clustering, before de- riving the ARCH and GARCH models, firmly anchoring the models in the funda- mental theory. Three univariate GARCH model extensions are then introduced, namely the EGARCH, FIGARCH and GJR-GARCH models, in addition to mul- tivariate GARCH-X models with autoregressive mean models, dependent on the VIX. The models are used to forecast the expected future 30-day volatility of the Norwegian stock market index OBX, using practical methods from the data science and machine learning space. The forecast performance of each GARCH model will then be compared with out-of-sample evaluation metrics, to determine which vari- ation is best suited for practical volatility forecasting.   The results of the model are then used to gain insight into how volatility behaves in the Norwegian stock market. 2

---

CHAPTER 1.   INTRODUCTION There are three goals for this thesis: 1. The primary goal is to develop robust models for forecasting the volatility of the OBX, by comparing the performance of different GARCH models available in the arch model library in Python, bridging fundamental financial theory on volatility clustering with practical modern forecasting techniques. 2. Secondly, this thesis examines the relationship between the VIX index and OBX. By empirically analysing the VIX term in our mean model, we can gain insights into how implied volatility in US markets affect Norwegian markets. 3. Finally, this thesis is meant to make the case for econometric models in modern quantitative finance. In successfully estimating predictive GARCH models, classical econometric models are shown to still have a place in mod- ern quantitative financial modelling. Furthermore, since the models output coefficient estimations, they provide a great deal of insight into the under- lying market dynamics, which cannot be obtained by a neural network.  1.3   Structure of the Thesis  This thesis is structured as follows: Chapter 2 describes the background, all rele- vant theory, and analyses for the thesis. Chapter 3 includes a description of the data used, in addition to being the methodology chapter. The methodology section of this chapter discusses the de- cisions, and methods used for conducting, and evaluating the study. Chapter 4 is a brief literature review, describing the existing literature for volatility modelling for the OBX. Many terms and concepts from the theory out- lined in chapter 2, and methods discussed in chapter 3 are discussed in the litera- ture review, as they have been used by other authors as well. For this reason, the literature review will succeed chapter 2 and 3. Chapter 5 details the results, analysis, and discussion of the study.   First, the results of the preliminary analyses are presented, followed by the forecasting results for each model, and the coefficients for the best performing models. The results are then explained and the findings are discussed. Finally, chapter 6 summarises the findings in the study, and offers suggestions on further work.  1.4   Contribution  There are many papers available on volatility forecasting using GARCH models, however the available literature on volatility forecasting on the OBX is limited. The existing literature is characterized by general papers and theses on the Nordic region as a whole, with fewer models utilized and fewer data points analysed. 3

---

CHAPTER 1.   INTRODUCTION There is also some literature available on the spillover effect of volatility be- tween Nordic countries, but there seem to be no available literature on volatility spillover between US and Nordic markets. The relationship between the VIX and OBX seems to be completely unexplored in the literature as well. This thesis contributes to the literature as it is far more comprehensive than what is currently available. In this thesis, we will examine eight GARCH models, compared to the existing literature where only two or tree models are examined per paper. Furthermore, we conduct much more detailed research into the OBX, on a larger data set, with more comprehensive model validation techniques. Additionally, this thesis fills a gap in the literature when it comes to the rela- tionship between the VIX and the OBX, and volatility spillover from the US to Norway. 4

---

CHAPTER  TWO  BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  2.1   The OBX  The Oslo Børs Total Return Index (OBX) is one of the main stock market indices for the Norwegian stock market, and consists of the 25 most traded securities on the Oslo Stock Exchange. It was launched in 1987 and as of September 2024 has an annual return of 7.08% (Euronext, 2024). Composition wise, the largest sec- tor in the OBX is energy, which mirrors the highly oil and gas-focused economy in Norway.   This composition differs from the main US index S&P 500, where technology is the largest sector (Euronext, 2024).   Since the composition of the index mirrors the broader Norwegian economy, the index is not only a gauge of the health of the Norwegian stock market, but it can in a broader sense be considered a proxy for the Norwegian economy.  Figure 2.1.1:   Historical log-prices for the OBX (Investing.com, 2025). 5

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK Even though the primary market for shares of the OBX is active and liquid, the traded volume in the derivatives market is limited. For the public options market on Euronext, the volume of daily options volume traded is often zero for most strike prices. As Euronext has public logs for all completed trades for the last five trading days, the lack of activity in this market is apparent. From January 7th to January 13th, there were a total of 1205 options contracts traded, resulting in an average of 241 contracts traded each day (Euronext, 2025). This limited liquidity in the derivatives market has significant implications for both price discovery and risk management, as the low volume of transactions makes these derivatives much more difficult to estimate, posing a challenge for investors seeking to hedge positions or speculate on volatility (Chang and Pant, 2003).  2.2   Financial Time Series Modelling  Financial markets are highly complex, and influenced by countless factors that affect asset prices and market behaviour.   These factors range from macroeco- nomic indicators and corporate earnings reports, to geopolitical events and even rumours. The sheer volume of data and the rapid pace at which new information arrives make time series analysis of financial data particularly challenging, as the structure of the data reflects the inherent complexity of financial markets.   The seemingly random movements of stock prices can be modelled through stochastic processes, meaning the time series contain random variables, and are not wholly deterministic. To illustrate this, consider the time series of the returns of a finan- cial asset   y   given as  r t   = ln     y t  y t − 1    =   x ′  t θ   +   ϵ t ,   ϵ t | ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 ...   ∼ N   (0 , σ 2  t   ) ,   (2.1a)  ϵ t   =   σ t e t ,   e t   ∼   i.i.d.   N   (0 ,   1) ,   (2.1b) where   r t   is the logarithmic return of asset   y   at time   t ,   x ′  t   is a vector of explana- tory variables at time   t , and   θ   is a vector of unknown parameters representing model coefficients.   ϵ t   is a stochastic process at time   t   conditional on its lagged values, and follows a normal distribution with a mean of zero and a variance of   σ 2  t  (Bollerslev, 1986), and   e t   is a standard normal variable, meaning that it is a ran- dom normally distributed variable and is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) (Sucarrat, 2021). There are several challenges in estimating the returns directly.   Firstly, as described by Bollerslev (1987),   r t   is uncorrelated across time such that   E ( r t   |  r t − 1 , r t − 2 , ... ) = 0 , and therefore not possible to forecast using price data alone. This is consistent with the weak form of the Efficient Market Hypothesis, which states that past returns are independent from future returns (Dias et al., 2020). The second problem in estimating returns, is that the time series is highly het- eroscedastic, meaning that the variance of the returns will vary over time instead of being a constant factor. This violates the assumption of homoscedasticity for Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates, resulting in biased estimations (Bun and 6

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK Harrison, 2019). If we were to estimate the returns using a conventional autore- gressive model, we would end up with low model accuracy, regardless of whether our results were statistically significant or not. This non-constant variance is known as conditional variance, with the magni- tude of the conditional variance being known as volatility (University of Auckland, n.d.). This metric is used to measure risk in modern portfolio theory, and can vary greatly over time for all types of asset prices. The conditional variance can be estimated using the returns   r t   from equation 2.1a, given as Var ( r t | r t − 1 , r t − 2 ... )   (Engle, 1982). Here we see that the variance is conditional on earlier lagged returns. In a practical sense, conditional variance can be estimated by calculating the historical variance for a specific time interval conditional only on a set of neigh- bours, denoted by   M   .   This approach is based on Abadie and Imbens (2008), where the computed conditional variance will be the historical variance of an   M  sized time period, from   t   to   t   −   ( M   −   1) . For   M   = 20 , we obtain the conditional variance of the returns for a time period of one month, given as  σ 2  t   =   Var ( r t   |   r t − 1 , r t − 2 , ..., r t − 19 ) =   1 20  t X  i = t − 19  ( r i   −   r t : t − 19 ) 2 ,   (2.2) where   σ 2  t   is the conditional variance of the returns over a 20 day period, from   t − 19  to   t .   r i   is the rate of return at time   i   from equation 2.1a, and   r t : t − 19   is the mean of the returns over the same 20-day period. We measure the monthly conditional variance over 20-day periods, since there are roughly 20 trading days in a month.  2.2.1   Volatility Clustering  Using equation 2.1a we can compute the returns for the OBX and plot them against time   t , as shown in figure 2.2.1 below.   Here we may observe that spikes in the magnitude of the returns seem to appear in groups, or clusters. The figure shows that the OBX has concentrated periods of high volatility, where large movements tend to be followed by large movements, and concentrated periods of low volatility, where small movements tend to follow small movements.   This phenomenon is known as volatility clustering (Cont, 2007). 7

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  Figure 2.2.1:   Historical returns (in %) for the OBX. Returns are computed on price data discussed in chapter 3.1, using equation 2.1a multiplied by 100. Volatility clustering is easier to notice visually if we plot the volatility itself, as op- posed to the returns. If we perform a rolling calculation based on equation 2.2, we obtain a series of values for   σ 2  t   which we can plot against its corresponding points in time, as observed in figure 2.2.2.   Here we can clearly see that large changes tend to be followed by large changes, and small changes tend to be followed by small changes.  Figure 2.2.2:   Conditional variance for the OBX. The conditional variance is computed using 2.2 on the returns depicted in figure 2.2.1. 8

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK An interesting feature of volatility clustering is that although the conditional vari- ance displays noticeable signs of autocorrelation, the returns for the same asset, which the variance is derived from, do not display any degree of autocorrelation at all. This phenomenon can be observed empirically through the Partial Autocor- relation Function (PACF) for   r t   and   σ 2  t   .   The PACF shows the autocorrelation between a variable and its lagged value, and is given as the coefficient of an autoregressive variable   X t   at lag   k , conditional on   X t − k   (Penn State Univer- sity, n.d.).   To illustrate this, consider an autoregressive process AR( k ):   X t   =  β 1 X t − 1   +   β 2 X t − 2   +   ...   +   β k X t − k . The PACF at lag   k , will simply be the coefficient  β k . By estimating AR(10) models for both our variables   r t   and   σ 2  t   , we can plot the PACF from lag 0 to 10. This enables us to assess the autocorrelations of the returns and volatility for the OBX, as observed in figures 2.2.3a and 2.2.3b. Here, we see no significant autocorrelation for the returns, consistent with the efficient market hypothesis. In contrast, we see strong autocorrelation for the conditional variance at lag 1, showing the presence of volatility clustering.  (a)   PACF plot of returns   (b)   PACF plot of volatility  Figure 2.2.3:   Plots of the PACF for returns and conditional variance of OBX. The blue shaded area signifies the error bounds for a 95% confidence interval, such that only values outside the shaded area are statistically significant.  2.3   ARCH and GARCH Models  There are many models available for modelling conditional variance. Furthermore, we can capture the properties of volatility clustering and use these processes to forecast the future expected volatility. A fundamental model for volatility modelling is the Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity (ARCH) model. Introduced by Nobel Prize laureate Robert F. Engle in 1982, the ARCH model is designed to model financial time series with time-varying volatility based on squared returns (Engle, 1982). This makes ARCH models useful for financial modelling where the time series are often heteroscedas- tic, as opposed to conventional econometric models such as AR and MA models which require constant variance (Bera and Higgins, 1993). 9

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK The key assumption of the ARCH model is that the conditional variance at time   t , depends only on the sum of past squared returns (Engle, 1982).   As we know, the returns   r t   are not autocorrelated, as evidenced by the Efficient Market Hypothesis, and shown visually in figure 2.2.3a. We can however, observe that   r 2  t  is autocorrelated by deriving the ARCH model from the returns in equation 2.1a. The derivation gives us insight into how uncorrelated returns can be modified to capture the property of volatility clustering. Consider the following derivation of the conditional variance, based on Miami University (n.d.): Var ( r t   |   r t − 1 , r t − 2 , ... ) =   Var ( ϵ t   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) = ([ E ( ϵ 2  t   )   −   E ( ϵ t ) 2 ]   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) = ([ E ( ϵ 2  t   )   −   0]   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) =   E ( ϵ 2  t   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) =   E ( σ 2  t   e 2  t   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) =   σ 2  t   E ( e 2  t   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) =   σ 2  t   ×   1 =   σ 2  t  It is important to note that   x ′  t   from equation 2.1a is deterministic, making the stochastic term   ϵ t   wholly responsible for the variance of the returns, such that Var ( r t   |   r t − 1 , r t − 2 , ... ) =   Var ( ϵ t   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) =   σ 2  t   . From the derivation above, we have that   σ 2  t   =   E ( ϵ 2  t   |   ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 , ... ) , meaning that   σ 2  t   is a function of the residuals through history, and the conditional variance will therefore follow this autoregres- sive process:   σ 2  t   =   ω   +   α 1 ϵ 2  t − 1   +   α 2 ϵ 2  t − 2   +   ...   +   α q ϵ 2  t − q   (Engle, 1982).   This is the ARCH process, and through it we see that the residuals can be squared to model volatility clustering. This property can be observed visually by plotting the PACF for   r 2  t   , as observed in figure 2.3.1.  Figure 2.3.1:   Plot of the PACF for squared returns of the OBX up to 10 lags. The blue shaded area signifies the error bounds for a 95% confidence interval, such that only values outside the shaded area are statistically significant. 10

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK The general form of an ARCH model of order ( q ) is therefore given as  σ 2  t   =   ω   +  q  X  i =1  α i ϵ 2  t − i ,   (2.3) where   ω   is a constant and   α i   are coefficients associated with past squared errors  ϵ 2  t − i   (Bera and Higgins, 1993). Even though the ARCH model serves as a solid theoretical foundation for modelling conditional variance, it has one major drawback:   Even though the squared residuals model volatility clustering, the order of   q   must often be very high to do so effectively.   To capture the autoregressive property of the single lag for   σ 2  t   in figure 2.2.3b, the PACF for   r 2  t   in figure 2.3.1 requires many lags to achieve the same effect. This leads to complex and unwieldy models, that limit the practical applications for ARCH models (Bollerslev, 1986). To account for this challenge, the Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Het- eroscedasticity (GARCH) model, proposed by Tim Bollerslev in 1986, extends the ARCH model by allowing the conditional variance to also depend on its own past values (Bollerslev, 1986). By taking the ARCH model and adding an autoregres- sive term for the lagged variances, the GARCH model captures the property of volatility clustering in a much more efficient way, making it more suitable for fore- casting time series from a practical perspective. A GARCH model of order ( p, q ) is given as  σ 2  t   =   ω   +  q  X  i =1  α i ϵ 2  t − i   +  p  X  j =1  β j   σ 2  t − j   ,   (2.4) where the first summation term   P q i =1   α i ϵ 2  t − i   captures the effect of past shocks, and is essentially an ARCH model.   The second summation term   P p j =1   β j   σ 2  t − j  includes the coefficients   β j   and the variances   σ 2  t − j   , allowing for the inclusion of past conditional variances, capturing the property of volatility clustering in the model (Bollerslev, 1986).  2.3.1   Parameter Constraints  GARCH models have specific parameter constraints to ensure that the model is mathematically stable and consistent with real world financial data. Firstly, the parameters associated with the past squared residuals and past variances must be non-negative (Bollerslev, 1986). This condition is required to prevent the conditional variance from becoming negative, which would be nonsen- sical in a real-world context as the variance should always be positive or zero. The non-negativity constraints are  q  X  i =1  α i   ≥   0 ,  p  X  j =1  β j   ≥   0  11

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK Secondly, the model has to display mean-reverting properties (Bollerslev, 1986). Conventional autoregressive models require weak stationarity, with constant mean, variance and covariance to give unbiased estimations.   For GARCH models, the assumptions of constant variance and constant covariance naturally do not hold, since the entire point of these models is to estimate the conditional variance. True stationarity is therefore not an assumption for GARCH models; however, the model still needs to display mean reverting properties, meaning that the model can contain neither a deterministic nor a stochastic trend. This ensures that the residuals will converge to its unconditional mean as   lim t →∞   (Bollerslev, 1986). The mean reversion constraints are given by  q  X  i =1  α i   +  p  X  j =1  β j   <   1  2.3.2   The Mean Model  GARCH models rely on estimating models for both the first and second moments of the probability distribution of the returns. The first moment of a probability distribution is the mean, given by the estimated model for the returns, and the second moment is the variance, given by the results of our main GARCH model, based on the residuals   ϵ t   from the mean model. To determine the mean model for the univariate GARCH models, we estimate a model for   r t   based on equation 2.1a  r t   =   μ   +   ϵ t ,   ϵ t | ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 ...   ∼ N   (0 , σ 2  t   ) ,   (2.5) where   μ   is the intercept of the model.   r t − 1   / ∈   x ′  t , since   E ( r t   |   r t − 1 , r t − 2 , ... ) = 0 , and is therefore not included in the mean model. In fact, as strictly endogenous GARCH models do not specify any variables for the vector   x ′  t , the term is omitted, leaving us with the intercept only (Bollerslev, 1986). To obtain the residuals used in the variance model, we solve for   ϵ t   and get  ϵ t   =   r t   −   μ   (2.6) Thus, since   r t   is the input for the model, computing the mean model of a univariate GARCH model simply involves estimating the constant   μ   (Bollerslev, 1986).  2.3.3   Probability Distribution Specification  From Bollerslev (1986), we see that the GARCH model assume normally dis- tributed residuals.   Due to the inherent complexity of financial time series, it is not always guaranteed that the returns are perfectly normally distributed, as shifts in behaviour can lead to the distribution being skewed or otherwise non-normal. We can examine the underlying features of the probability distribution of the OBX, by computing skewness and kurtosis. Skewness is the third moment of the probability distribution, and is a measure of the asymmetry of the distribution. If the distribution stretches toward the right or left tail, it is skewed. Skewness levels between   ±   1.0 are considered symmetric distributions (Wooldridge, 2016). The skewness is given by 12

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK Skewness   =  1  n  P T t =1 ( r t   −   r t ) 3     1  n  P T t =1 ( r t   −   r t ) 2   3 / 2   ,   (2.7) where   n   is the number of observations in the series, and   r t   is the mean of the returns. Kurtosis is the fourth moment of the probability distribution, and measures the heaviness of the tails relative to a normal distribution, and is given by Kurtosis   =  1  n  P T t =1 ( r t   −   r t ) 4     1  n  P T t =1 ( r t   −   r t ) 2   2   (2.8) Equations 2.7 and 2.8 are from Wooldridge (2016).   A kurtosis of   <   3   indicates that the distribution has thinner tails and a flatter peak compared to a normal dis- tribution, known as platykurtic. This would signal that outliers are less frequent. A kurtosis of   ≈   3   indicates that the distribution is close to a normal distribution, known as mesokurtic. A kurtosis of   >   3   indicates that the distribution has fatter tails and a sharper peak compared to a normal distribution, known as leptokurtic (NIST, n.d.). Financial time series have a tendency to display fat tails in the probability distribution, as financial markets occasionally yield returns far from the mean of the distribution. Because of this, the use of the t-distribution instead of the normal distribution when estimating mean models might seem logical, as the t-distribution accommodates fat tails much better (Wooldridge, 2016).   This is however, not necessarily the case. In the seminal paper on ARCH models, Engle (1982) argues that the unconditional kurtosis observed in financial time series, is rather the result of the conditional variance of normally distributed variables across time. "Although the process defined by (1) and (3) has all observations conditionally normally distributed, the vector of   y   is not jointly normally distributed.   The joint density is the product of all the conditional densities and, therefore, the log likelihood is the sum of the conditional normal log likelihoods corresponding to (1) and (3)" (Engle, 1982, p. 990). In this quote, (1), (2) and (3) refer to equations, and   y   is equivalent to the returns   r t   in this thesis.   In short, the non-constant conditional variance in the data results in fat tails in the probability distribution. For assuming normally distributed residuals in the GARCH-models, the OBX returns should therefore be symmetric, and leptokurtic.  2.3.4   Unit Root Test  One of the most important assumptions for estimating a GARCH model is that the mean model displays mean-reverting properties (Andersson, 2020).   Specifically, the variables in the mean model cannot contain unit roots, meaning that the time series must be mean stationary.   A mean stationary time series is a series that does not contain a stochastic trend, rather the series will revert to the mean after experiencing shocks. To test for unit roots in the variables included in the mean model, we can perform an Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test (Greene, 2012). The ADF test assesses the null hypothesis that the time series has a unit root, 13

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK against the alternative hypothesis that the series is stationary. We estimate the following regression:  ∆ y t   =   α   +   δy t − 1   +  p  X  j =1  ϕ j   ∆ y t − j   +   u t ,   (2.9) where   ∆ y t   =   y t   −   y t − 1   and is the first difference of the dependent variable,   α   is a constant,   p   is the number of lags of   ∆ y t   included to control for autocorrelation, and   u t   is the error term (Greene, 2012). We form the following hypotheses:  H 0   :   δ   = 0  H A   :   δ <   0  To determine whether to reject the null hypothesis or not, the ADF statistic, based on the estimated coefficient   ˆ δ   from equation 2.9, given as   ADF τ   =   ˆ δ Std.Err ( ˆ δ )   , is compared against critical values from the Dickey Fuller t-distribution.   If the ADF statistic is less than the critical value, the null hypothesis is rejected, and the series is determined to be stationary.   Otherwise, the null hypothesis is not rejected, indicating the presence of a unit root. The ADF critical values for model 2.9 are   − 3 . 434   for a 99% confidence level, and   − 2 . 863   for a 95% confidence level (Zaiontz, n.d.). For financial time series such as stock returns, stationarity is generally expected due to their nature as differences or percentage changes in prices.   However, it is still important to empirically test for stationarity to validate this assumption before proceeding with further analysis.  2.3.5   Maximum Likelihood Estimation  As GARCH models are non-linear, we cannot estimate them using linear methods such as residual sum of squares, as we would have done for a simple OLS regression. Instead, a method known as Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) must be used (Miami University, n.d.). MLE is an optimisation technique used for estimating the parameters of a statistical model, based on a given probability distribution. MLE selects the parameter values that maximize the natural logarithm of the likelihood function, meaning the highest likelihood of observing our data under the assumption that the model is correctly estimated (Eliason, 1993). First, we assume a statistical model with a likelihood function   L ( θ )   for the con- ditional variance   σ 2  t   .   θ   are the parameters of the model, which for a GARCH(1,1) variance model would be   θ   = ( ω, α, β ) .   Intuitively,   L ( θ )   is the probability of observing the given data under the given parameters   θ .   Before performing the MLE, we must compute the natural logarithm of   L ( θ ) , giving us the log-likelihood function. Using the logarithmic transformation of the likelihood function is com- putationally advantageous because it transforms products into sums, making the calculations simpler, and therefore more computationally efficient for large data sets. The log-likelihood function is defined as  ln   L ( θ ) = ln  T Y  t =1  f   ( σ 2  t   ;   θ )  !  =  T X  t =1  ln   f   ( σ 2  t   ;   θ ) ,   (2.10) 14

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK where   L ( θ ) =   Q T t =1   f   ( σ 2  t   ;   θ )   is the likelihood function, given the probability density function   f   ( σ 2  t   ;   θ )   of the conditional variance, given the parameters   θ   (Zivot, 2021). To find the parameter values for   θ   that maximise the log-likelihood function, the general approach is to construct a gradient vector with derivatives of   ln   L ( θ )  with respect to the parameters   θ , as shown below (Zivot, 2021).  ∇ θ   ln   L ( θ ) =             ∂   ln   L ( θ )  ∂θ 1  ∂   ln   L ( θ )  ∂θ 2  . . .  ∂   ln   L ( θ )  ∂θ k             where   ∇ θ   ln   L ( θ )   is the gradient of the log-likelihood function.   We then set the expression to zero, and solve for   θ .   In practice however,   ∇ θ   ln   L ( θ ) = 0   cannot be solved analytically for complex models like GARCH, and requires numerical methods or iterative approaches to estimate a Hessian matrix, as the log-likelihood function for GARCH models is inherently non-linear and can exhibit multiple local maxima and minima (Zivot, 2021). There are several algorithms available for maximising log-likelihood functions, however a detailed description of these is outside the scope of this thesis.   The seminal paper by Bollerslev (1986) contains an example of an iterative optimisation technique, and the specific algorithm used for this thesis is referenced in chapter 3.5.  2.4   GARCH Model Extensions  Due to its popularity, many variations of the GARCH model have been introduced over the years. They all share the fundamental principles of the "vanilla" GARCH model, namely that they seek to model ARCH effects   ϵ 2  t   , and GARCH effects   σ 2  t   . In this thesis, in addition to the vanilla GARCH model, four exotic GARCH models are discussed, as extensions of the original model. These models are the EGARCH, FIGARCH, GJR-GARCH and GARCH-X model. These model extensions have been chosen due to their ability to capture asym- metric effects in volatility, which the traditional GARCH model might not be able to model effectively. Furthermore, all of the models used in this thesis are avail- able in the arch library in Python, making them convenient to construct. As these models are easily accessible, the value in comparing the performance of each of these models is significant.  2.4.1   EGARCH  The Exponential GARCH (EGARCH) model was introduced by Tim Bollerslev in 1991. It was developed to address certain limitations of the standard GARCH model, particularly its inability to model asymmetries in the volatility response 15

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK to shocks in financial time series data.   This asymmetric property in volatility is known as the leverage effect, and refers to the observed tendency of an as- set’s volatility to be negatively correlated with the asset’s returns (Ait-Sahalia et al., 2013).   Under the leverage effect, a rise in an asset’s volatility drives its price down, which in turn increases volatility, creating a downward spiral.   The EGARCH model seeks to model this feedback-loop through an asymmetry term, where negative shocks can have a larger impact on future volatility than posi- tive shocks of the same magnitude (McAleer and Hafner, 2014). One additional strength of EGARCH is that it ensures that the conditional variance is always pos- itive without requiring the parameter constraint for non-negativity, as the model uses logarithmic transformations of   σ 2  t   .   An EGARCH model of order ( p, o, q ) is given as  σ 2  t   =   exp   ω   +  q  X  i =1  α i | e t − i |   +  o X  k =1  δ k e t − k   +  p  X  j =1  β k   ln   σ 2  t − j  !  ,   (2.11a)  e t   =   ϵ t  σ t  ,   e t   ∼   i.i.d.   N   (0 ,   1) ,   (2.11b) where   δ k e t − k   is the asymmetry term and   e t   are the standardised shocks from equation 2.1b. This model is asymmetric if   δ ̸   = 0 , while leverage exists if   δ <   0  and   δ < α <   − δ   (McAleer and Hafner, 2014).  2.4.2   FIGARCH  The Fractionally Integrated GARCH (FIGARCH) model was introduced by Bail- lie, Bollerslev, and Mikkelsen in 1996.   The FIGARCH model is designed to ac- count for long-memory in a time series, which is when autocorrelations decay more slowly than in typical stationary time series. This is done by capturing the persistence of shocks over time through a fractional differencing parameter, mean- ing that the degree of differencing is given as a fraction, rather than an integer (Baillie et al., 1996). The idea is that if the volatility of stock prices contain not only short-term autocorrelations, but also long-memory properties, the FIGARCH model should be an effective model for volatility forecasting. When constructing a FIGARCH model, the lag operator   L   is used to make the expression more interpretable. When applied to a variable, the lag operator returns a lagged version of the same variable, where the exponent of the lag operator is equal to the number of lags for the variable, such as:   L k y t   =   y t − k . This can be used further to simplify differentiated expressions, such as   (1   −   L ) y t   =   y t   −   y t − 1 . This makes lag operators especially useful when constructing models with many differentiated terms such as FIGARCH, which would otherwise result in complex and unwieldy models. A FIGARCH model of order ( p, q ) is given as  σ 2  t   =   ω   + [1   −   β ( L )   −   [1   −   α ( L )](1   −   L ) d ] ϵ 2  t   +   β ( L ) σ 2  t   ,   (2.12) where   d   is the fractional differencing parameter estimated in the model itself through MLE.   α ( L ) =   α 1 L   +   α 2 L 2   +   ...   +   α q L q , and   β ( L ) =   β 1 L   +   β 2 L 2   +   ...   +   β p L p  (Belkhouja and Boutahary, 2011). 16

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  2.4.3   GJR-GARCH  The Glosten, Jagannathan, Runkle-GARCH (GJR-GARCH) model was intro- duced by Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle in 1993. Similar to the EGARCH, the GJR-GARCH model accounts for the asymmetric effects of positive and neg- ative shocks on volatility, allowing negative shocks to increase volatility more than positive ones (Glosten et al., 1993). Instead of modelling the leverage effect through standard normal variables as the EGARCH does, the GJR-GARCH in- stead utilises an indicator term in the form of a dummy variable, conditional on the returns being negative.   This enables the model to capture different proper- ties of market volatility, depending on whether the asset experiences downside or upside shocks. A GJR-GARCH model of order ( p, o, q ) is given as  σ 2  t   =   ω   +  q  X  i =1  α i ϵ 2  t − i   +  o X  k =1  δ k ϵ 2  t − k I { ϵ t − k   < 0 }   +  p  X  j =1  β j   σ 2  t − j   ,   (2.13) where   I { ϵ t − k   < 0 }   is the dummy variable that equals 1 if   ϵ t − k   <   0 , and 0 otherwise (Glosten et al., 1993).  2.4.4   GARCH-X  Up until this point, several different univariate extensions of the vanilla GARCH model have been explored.   However, these models assume that the volatility is only explained by lagged values of returns and volatility.   These are both en- dogenous variables, meaning that the model is only determined by its own values across time. This might seem overly simplistic, considering that financial markets are affected by a multitude of factors, both internal and external.   To account for outside factors, we can include exogenous variables in our GARCH models, making the models multivariate. These models are known as GARCH-X models, and are beneficial when we believe that the returns are affected by external factors which we can model (Yeasin et al., 2020). The intuition behind this approach is that a variable with significant effect on the first moment (mean), will have an effect on the second moment (variance) as well. To do this, we can simply include an autoregressive variable   X t   as an exogenous term in our mean model. This is different from univariate GARCH models, which employ a constant mean   μ , and where it is assumed that no external variables affect stock returns. An important consideration for the mean model is that since the residuals are retrieved from an estimated model for the returns, the accuracy of the residuals will increase as the mean model estimation improves.   This is the argument for GARCH-X models, as even though the included variables are not directly part of the variance models, the increase in the estimation quality of the residuals makes the variance model perform better. A key strength of this approach is its flexibility, as any number of exogenous variables can be added to the mean model, and any variations of GARCH models can be modified into multivariate exogenous models (Sucarrat, 2021). To construct the mean model for a GARCH-X model, we consider equation 2.1a, and estimate the following mean model: 17

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  r t   =   μ   +   γX t   +   ϵ t ,   ϵ t | ϵ t − 1 , ϵ t − 2 ...   ∼ N   (0 , σ 2  t   ) ,   (2.14) where   X t   ∈   x ′  t ,   γ   ∈   θ , and   μ   is a constant. We then solve for   ϵ t   in a similar fashion as the mean model for our univariate models, and obtain the following residuals for our variance models:  ϵ t   =   r t   −   μ   −   γX t   (2.15) The application of this type of model is not only to improve forecasting accuracy, but also to gain insight into which factors influence both the returns and the volatility of an asset. By including an exogenous variable which can be modelled, we can perform a better estimation of our dependent mean variable, and by proxy the conditional variance.  2.5   VIX and Implied Volatility  The Norwegian stock market does not exist in a vacuum. Like all markets, it is interconnected with global financial dynamics, and particularly influenced by the American economy, which acts as a bellwether for international financial markets. Throughout history, periods of high and low volatility have existed in both US and Norwegian equity market simultaneously, caused by economic conditions affecting the entire world. Many of the greatest recessions in history have affected the global financial system, like the Great Depression in 1929, the 2008 Financial Crisis or the Coronavirus Pandemic in 2020, all periods with significant spikes in volatility.   It is therefore reasonable to expect that volatility in the leading American stock market index Sandard & Poors 500 (S&P 500) has some effect on the volatility of the OBX. The S&P 500 Volatility Index (VIX) was introduced by the Chicago Board Options Exchange in 1993, and is the leading benchmark index for the volatility of American equities. Often referred to as the "fear gauge", the VIX measures the market expectation of the daily volatility for the S&P 500 the next 30 days (Cboe, 2022).   While equity indices are calculated using the prices of their component stocks, the VIX uses the price of options contracts on the S&P 500 to gauge the market’s expectation of future volatility, known as the implied volatility.   The implied volatility is an important factor in options pricing, where all else being equal, an option’s value will increase as the volatility of the underlying asset increases. The intuition behind this effect is that as the volatility increases, the probability of an option being in the money increases. For more information on options, see McDonald (2013). From figure 2.5.1, we can see similarities in the movements between the VIX and the conditional volatility of the OBX. The figures will however not be entirely similar, as the VIX uses the standard deviation as its unit, compared to the vari- ance which are squared standard deviations. Even though the figures displaying variances will have more extreme values than the figure displaying standard devi- ations, we can still see large peaks in volatility in 2008 and 2020 for both the VIX and the OBX. 18

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  Figure 2.5.1:   Historical values for VIX (FRED, 2025). We can also observe volatility clustering for implied volatility. As shown in figure 2.5.2, the VIX demonstrates similar autoregressive properties as the conditional volatility of the OBX, suggesting not only a strong link between historic and im- plied volatility, but also a similar pattern in the behaviour of US and Norwegian equity volatility.  Figure 2.5.2:   PACF plot for VIX for up to 10 lags based on data from FRED (2025).   The blue shaded area signifies the error bounds for a 95% confidence interval, such that only values outside the shaded areas are statistically significant. What separates implied volatility from the conditional volatility that have been examined so far in this thesis, is that the implied volatility is inherently forward looking. This is due to options pricing being conditional on the probability of an option being exercised. For instance, if a deep out-of-the-money option is priced highly, the market expects the underlying to move in price in a major way to receive a payout. Although there is no closed form equation for implied volatility, the VIX es- timates a volatility measure by comparing options at different strike prices. The 19

---

CHAPTER 2.   BACKGROUND & THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK VIX is calculated using the following formula: VIX   = 100   ×  v u u t   2  T  X  i  ∆ K i  K 2  i  e RT   Q ( K i )   −   1  T     F K 0  −   1   2  ,   (2.16a)  ∆ K i   =   K i +1   −   K i − 1  2   ,   (2.16b) where   T   is the time to expiration of the options (in years),   K i   is the strike price of the   i th   out-of-the-money option, and   ∆ K i   is the interval between strike prices.  e RT   is the exponential factor, accounting for the risk-free rate   R   and the time to expiration   T   .   Q ( K i )   is the midpoint of the bid-ask spread for the   i th   strike option and   F   is the forward index level, derived from the prices of the options.   K 0   is the first strike price below the forward index level   F   (Cboe, 2022). It is worth mentioning that estimating an implied volatility measure requires significant trading volume for the respective options, as implied volatility estima- tion relies on efficient option prices for a number of strikes. This prevents us from estimating a VIX-like index for Norwegian equities, due to the low liquidity in Norwegian options markets, as presented in chapter 2.1. By including the VIX as an exogenous variable in a GARCH-X model, we can model the volatility of the OBX as a function of the implied volatility for the US stock market. This will allow us to examine the effect of US stock market volatility on Norwegian equity volatility, and further enable us to use the forward-looking properties of implied volatility in our forecasts. 20

---

CHAPTER  THREE  DATA & METHODOLOGY  3.1   Data Sources  There are many open-source databases available for downloading historical price data for financial assets.   Many of the large web services like Yahoo Finance also have quotes for Norwegian indices like OBX, however many of them have incomplete data, with sections of missing data too large to interpolate.   Even specialised Norwegian web sites like ba-odegaard.no claim to have daily prices for OBX as far back as the late 1980s, but after closer inspection they are often riddled with missing values. A resource with high quality free data for the OBX is investing.com, which has daily historical quotes from 08.09.1999 until today. The data from 2019 to 2024 however is severely lacking, so quotes from 11.07.2019 to 2024 are supplemented from yahoofinance.com, which has high quality data, but not as extensive data history for the OBX. The data is then downloaded as CSV files, and merged in Python as a Pandas dataframe. Investing.com is a financial markets platform for real-time data, historical prices and financial news.   Founded in 2007, the platform covers over 300 000 financial instruments (Investing.com, 2023). Values for VIX are much more straightforward to obtain, as daily quotes can be downloaded as CSV files from the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), fred.stlouisfed.org. FRED is an online database containing monetary data, and is created and maintained by the Research Department at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The platform serves as a database for all financial data, and are used by US government agencies such as Board of Governors, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labour Statistics, along with both institutional and private investors (FRED, 2023). Descriptive statistics for the OBX are presented in table 3.1.1. The statistics provide insights into the behaviour of the OBX returns, through the unconditional values for central tendency, dispersion, and distributional shape. 21

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY  Table 3.1.1:   Descriptive statistics for the OBX, calculated on the logarithmic returns from equation 2.1a multiplied by 100.  Statistic   Value  Mean   0.0355 Median   0.0868 Standard Deviation   1.4361 Maximum   11.0198 Minimum   -11.2730 Skewness   -0.5796 Kurtosis   7.1813 Observations   6040 The mean and median offer measures of central tendency, where the mean rep- resents the average unconditional return over time, and the median gives us an idea of weather the data is skewed when compared to the mean.   The uncondi- tional standard deviation measures the variability or spread of returns, providing an indication of the overall volatility of the index (Wooldridge, 2016). The maxi- mum and minimum values capture the most extreme positive and negative daily movements. For the skewness and kurtosis estimations, we can conclude that the probability distribution of the OBX is symmetric, and leptokurtic.   This means that the conditional heteroscedasticity in the returns results in fat tails in the unconditional probability distribution, consistent with Engle (1982). When performing MLE for the GARCH-models, normally distributed data will therefore be assumed. After cleaning, the data used in this thesis contain daily values from October 5th 1999 to May 8th 2024.  3.2   Considerations for Time Series Forecasting  When constructing robust predictive models, there are a number of considerations to take into account to ensure that the models are reliable. Firstly, two main considerations must be balanced, namely forecasting preci- sion and overfitting risk. "... overfitting occurs when an algorithm fits too closely or even exactly to its training data, resulting in a model that can’t make accu- rate predictions or conclusions from any data other than the training data" (IBM, 2024). Overfitting is a common pitfall in machine learning, as the thought of opti- mising an algorithm as much as possible is a tempting thought for all analysts. An effective way of reducing the risk of overfitting is to consider out-of-sample eval- uations, as opposed to in-sample evaluations.   In-sample evaluations are models which are evaluated on the same data that they were trained on (Tashman, 2000). If we were to fit the model too well to the training data, the in-sample evalua- tion metrics would continue to improve, giving us false hope on the effectiveness of the model. To reduce overfitting risk, out-of-sample evaluation should instead be used, which means evaluating the model on completely new data, by splitting the data into train and test sections (Reitermanova et al., 2010).   That way, an 22

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY overfitted model would perform poorly on the out-of-sample data and return poor forecast evaluation metrics. This would in turn give us a more accurate idea of the real predictive power of the model (Tashman, 2000). This topic bridges classical econometrics with modern machine learning theory, as these factors are common consideration in all areas of data science, statistics and analysis. Secondly, we need to be able to evaluate the performance of the models, and to ensure that the metrics describe the strengths and weaknesses of the models accurately. Selecting the correct forecast error metrics is therefore important, but the correct metrics can paint an inaccurate picture of how the model will perform in practice, if the data is structured incorrectly.   Model validation is therefore a critical consideration in time series forecasting, and essential for constructing robust predictive models. Finally, we must consider the increasing level of uncertainty of the predictions as we forecast further into the future. As seen in figure 3.2.1 below, a feature of time series forecasting is that the confidence bounds widens significantly for each time step we attempt to forecast. This is an important consideration for the mod- els, as we attempt to forecast 20 time steps into the future, equivalent to about one month.   The uncertainty of the predictions themselves will be reflected in the forecast error metrics without any additional work, assuming we have enough observations. However, we must have this consideration in mind when assessing the values of the forecast error metrics to have an expectation of what level of errors are acceptable in a "good model". A certain value of a forecast error metric might not be considered acceptable for a model forecasting tomorrow’s volatility, but a model forecasting next month’s volatility with the same accuracy might be considered excellent, considering all the factors that could affect the stock market a month from now.  Figure 3.2.1:   Example of expanding confidence bounds for time series forecasting.   T   denotes the present point in time (Wu et al., 2014). 23

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY  3.2.1   Model Selection  As GARCH models consist of lagged ARCH and GARCH processes, determining the appropriate number of lags to include in a model is crucial.   The more lags included in a model, the easier it is to capture complex patterns in the data. On the other hand, as the complexity of the model increases, the risk of overfitting increases as well.   In determining the order of the GARCH models, the balance between goodness of fit and generalisation is important to ensure the robustness of the model. From a practical perspective, this means that we want to capture the main trend in the data, without including too much noise.   The PACF can give a good indication on how many lags should be included, at least for the GARCH processes. Judging by the PACF plot for volatility in figure 2.2.3b, the correlations do not seem to be significant after lag 1, and we can therefore expect that a GARCH model with one lag is the optimal model. There is however a more empirical way of determining the optimal order of lags for the models. The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) statistics can be computed to determine optimal model selection, as they balance in-sample model fit and simplicity.   By estimating GARCH models for each order, and computing the AIC and BIC for each model, we can compare each model by its AIC and BIC statistic. The model with the lowest values would then be the optimal model to use (Javed and Mantalos, 2013). "The AIC is a metric for evaluating the accuracy of predictions and, by exten- sion, the validity of statistical models for any given data set and set of features" (Kanyongo and Ezugwu, 2023, p.   28).   The AIC is formulated to penalize the complexity of the model while rewarding good fit to the data, helping to avoid overfitting. The BIC is based on the Bayesian framework and provides a more substantial penalty for the number of parameters than the AIC, making it more conservative with respect to complex models (Burnham and Anderson, 2004). Both models reward goodness of fit and punish model complexity, and can be calculated using the following formulas: AIC   = 2 k   −   2 ln   L ( ˆ θ ) ,   (3.1a) BIC   =   k   ln ( n )   −   2 ln   L ( ˆ θ ) ,   (3.1b) where   ln   L ( ˆ θ )   is the estimated maxima of the log-likelihood function for the model parameters, representing goodness of fit,   n   is the number of observations, and   k  is the number of estimated parameters (Burnham and Anderson, 2004).  3.2.2   Forecast Evaluation Metrics  When performing predictive analyses, we need metrics for evaluating the effec- tiveness of the forecasts.   Moreover, these metrics must be easily interpretable, especially when comparative analyses of several models are performed. There are a multitude of metrics available, each with their own special qualities.   Choos- ing the right metric can therefore be a challenge, as the metrics need to measure properties in the models that are relevant to the underlying properties in the data. 24

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY For a thesis project like this where several different models are compared, the need for a standardised metric for overall prediction accuracy is important. Secondly, when forecasting market volatility, there is a particular need for the models to perform well in bear markets, and market crashes that often cause these bear markets.   These are violent spikes in volatility happening over short time spans, and would be of particular interest to forecast for any analyst looking to model volatility.   It is therefore advantageous to include an additional metric that is able to provide insight into the forecasting performance under these specific market conditions. Taking these considerations into account, the following forecast evaluation met- rics have been chosen:  3.2.2.1   Mean Average Percentage Error  Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) is a statistical measure that quantifies the accuracy of a forecast model as a percentage. MAPE uses the absolute differ- ences between the predicted and actual values, making it a well balanced linear forecast error metric (Leonardo, 2024a). The MAPE is very intuitive, providing a clear, easy-to-understand measurement of error magnitude as a percentage size of the data. The MAPE is given as MAPE   =  1  n  T X  t =1  σ 2  t   −   ˆ σ 2  t  σ 2  t  ×   100 ,   (3.2) where   σ 2  t   are the true observed variances,   ˆ σ 2  t   are the estimated values and   n   are the number of observations in the data (Leonardo, 2024a). A common weakness of MAPE is that it is undefined for   σ 2  t   = 0 , and therefore cannot be used for data containing zeros.   This can be challenging when using differenced time series values like returns, where prices can remain unchanged through two time steps and therefore produce returns of zero. For volatility how- ever, this weakness is eliminated due to the variance for equities over longer time periods almost never being zero, making the MAPE an especially suitable metric for volatility modelling. This is therefore the metric that will be used to evaluate the overall forecast performance of the models.  3.2.2.2   Root Mean Square Error  Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) measures the square root of the average mag- nitude of the squared errors (Leonardo, 2024b). The squaring of the errors gives higher weight to larger errors, making RMSE much more sensitive to outliers than a linear metric such as the MAPE. RMSE is therefore useful when large errors are particularly undesirable, and the model must be penalized for those errors.   We could achieve the same effect by using conventional Mean Square Errors (MSE) as well, but by taking the square root of the MSE, the metric becomes much easier to interpret as it will refer to the same unit of measurement as the dependent variable. In this , the MSE would refer to   σ 4  t   , compared to   σ 2  t   for the RMSE. The RMSE is given as 25

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY RMSE   =  v u u t   1  n  T X  t =1  ( σ 2  t   −   ˆ σ 2  t   ) 2 ,   (3.3) where   σ 2  t   are the true observed variances,   ˆ σ 2  t   are the estimated values and   n   are the number of observations in the data (Leonardo, 2024b). This metric is very useful for evaluating how well the model forecasts market crashes and bear markets, as forecast failures under market conditions with high volatility will produce very large errors when squared.  3.2.3   Model Validation  When performing time series analysis, it is important to ensure that the forecast error metrics provide accurate insights so we can interpret them at face value. If we have extensive overfitting in the models, the MAPE and RMSE values could provide us with positive results, despite the model forecasting inaccurately on new data. The goal of model validation is to avoid this, and it involves confirming that the model is performing as intended (KPMG, n.d.). One of the most important topics in model validation is data splitting.   If we use the model to forecast the same data that it has been trained it on, the model will most likely perform excellent, and the forecast error matrix would be low, regardless of the actual predictive power of the model. It is therefore crucial to split the data into training and testing sets, to ensure that the forecasts are evaluated on new data which the model has never seen before (Reitermanova et al., 2010). A popular method for data splitting is to split the data 70/30, or 80/20 for training and testing data. For most data analysis projects, this kind of approach is adequate, however for this particular data series, a simple approach such as this involves a major potential risk.   Considering that the data for OBX only stretches back to 1999, we do not have large amounts of historical data available, relative to the number of financial crises in the data. Especially the 2008 financial crisis was a multi-generational market crash with extremely high volatility and severe economic consequences, not seen since the Second World War (Eigner and Umlauft, 2015). The scope of the bear market can be observed as we compare the conditional variance of the 2008 financial crisis, to the dramatic, but still less severe 2020 Coronavirus pandemic market crash in figure 2.2.2. There is a possibility of the models systematically overestimating the volatility for the data, due to the 2008 financial crisis being a significant outlier in the data set, especially when followed by another market crash 12 years later. If we were to analyse the S&P 500 which has much more historical data available, this outlier would represent a smaller share of the total data set, and would therefore not skew the data as much. This illustrates a common practical challenge in modelling financial assets with less historical data available. 26

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY  3.3   K-folds Cross-validation  To address the problem described in chapter 3.2.3, a validation technique known as k-folds cross-validation will be performed. This technique is common in machine learning literature, and involves dividing the data set into   k   test/train pairs, called folds, before estimating and evaluating the performance of each fold, and finally computing the mean of all folds (Shrivastava, 2020). First, the data is divided into   n   sections. Each model is then trained on the first section, before they are tested on the second section, and the values for the forecast error metrics are recorded. Then, the models are trained on the first and second sections combined, before they are tested on the third section. Sections   1   to   n   −   1  are used for training the models, and all iterations are tested on the subsequent section   n . Finally, the mean of the forecast error metrics is computed across all folds for each model, and the model with the best mean value is considered to be the optimal model (Assaad and Fayek, 2021). The approach described above is known as leave-one-out cross-validation. This is used for out-of-sample evaluation, as section   n   must be used for forecast evalu- ation. The number of folds used is therefore given by   k   =   n   −   1 , where   n   is the number of sections in the largest fold. Determining the value for   k   involves balanc- ing model inference and computing time, as a high number of folds may provide greater inference, but would also require us to estimate a high number of models. A usual number of sections for these types of time series projects are 5 sections, which means that for a leave-one-out cross-validation,   k   = 4   (Olsen, 2025). For this thesis, the standard leave-one-out cross-validation method with   k   = 4   folds is determined to be appropriate, as the models and calculations used are already computationally expensive, and increasing the number of folds would therefore limit practicality. Figure 3.3.1 outlines the k-folds cross-validation technique for  k   = 4   folds. K-folds cross-validation works well for analysing time series data with few data points or large outliers, as it generates several series from the same data set and compares them, without violating the sequential property of time series data (Assaad and Fayek, 2021).   The results from this technique greatly reduce the chance of the results being skewed, enabling us to trust the forecast evaluation metrics with greater confidence. 27

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY  Figure 3.3.1:   Outline of the k-folds cross-validation technique with   k   = 4   folds.  3.4   Testing Empirical Relationships  One of the objectives of this project is to examine the effect implied volatility for US markets has on the OBX returns. To empirically determine this, we need to perform a t-test. A t-test is a test that is used to compare the means of two variables, and whether the differences in mean are likely to be due to chance or not (Leonardo, 2024c). Through this test, we can mathematically test the statistical significance of the effect one variable has on another. In this case, the VIX price will be included in the mean model for the GARCH-X models, as seen in equation 2.14. By testing the significance of the coefficient   γ   in the mean model, we can empirically prove the relationship between the VIX price and the returns for the OBX. The following hypotheses are formulated:  H 0   :   γ   = 0  H A   :   γ <   0 ,  where the alternative hypothesis is that   γ <   0   as it is reasonable to expect a negative correlation between volatility and returns, since periods of high volatility such as financial crises have also been associated with falling asset prices. In estimating   γ   in the mean model, we can extract the p-value of the coefficient from the estimation. P-values measure the probability of obtaining the observed results by chance (Leonardo, 2024c), meaning that the lower the p-value, the more certain we can be that the observed value is statistically significant.   For a 99% confidence level, we have a critical value of 0.01, meaning that the p-value of   γ  must be   <   0 . 01   for us to be able to reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is an empirical relationship between VIX and the returns of OBX. 28

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY  3.5   Coding the GARCH models  For conducting the analysis and estimating models, the Python library known as arch will be used, from Sheppard (2024). This library contains practical functions for estimating all GARCH models covered in this thesis, and performs the MLE while ensuring that the parameter constraints are not violated. The arch library solves the MLE optimisation problem through the SciPy   optimize.minimize   func- tion, where the negative log-likelihood function   −   ln   L ( θ )   is minimised, equivalent to maximising the positive log-likelihood function.   For a detailed description of the numerical optimisation technique applied by SciPy, see Virtanen et al. (2020), and SciPy (2025). The arch library allows for the specification of different GARCH models, their orders, and the type of mean model. For univariate models, the mean is constant, specified by the argument   Constant   in the code, while for multivariate GARCH- VIX models, the mean model is autoregressive, specified by the argument   ARX . For coding the GARCH model, two functions have been created, one for es- timating the univariate GARCH models, and one for estimating the multivariate GARCH-VIX models.   Both functions follow the same general layout, but are coded separately for practicality, as the inclusion of an exogenous dataset requires more adjustments to the code than simply changing some parameters. Both functions utilise nested for-loops to perform rolling forecasts, by estimat- ing 20 sequential one-step forecasts for every point in time   t . To be more exact, in the second loop, the forecast for   σ 2  t +1   is used to estimate   σ 2  t +2 , and this estimation is then used to forecast   σ 2  t +3   and so on, all the way up to   σ 2  t +19 . Finally, the mean of each 20-day set of estimations for   σ 2  t   is calculated, to compute the expected daily volatility for the next month for that specific time step, before the first loop starts the process over for the next time step. Mathematically, the code replicates a formula laid out by Abadie and Imbens (2008), as a variation of equation 2.2 for the expected value of the conditional variance of a 20-step time period denoted as  ˆ σ 2  t   , from time   t   to   t   + 19 , given as  ˆ σ 2  t   =   E ( σ 2  t   ) =   1 20  t +19 X  i = t  ˆ σ 2  i   ,   (3.4) where   ˆ σ 2  i   is the estimated conditional variance at time   i , estimated using the GARCH model. The expected values are stored as a   n   ×   1   Pandas dataframe for the forecasted volatility, and evaluated against another   n   ×   1   dataframe consisting of the real conditional variance. This variance computed using the NumPy standard devia- tion function and squared, from time   t   to   t   + 19 , giving us the "future" historical 20-day volatility at time   t . These dataframes are used for computing the MAPE and RMSE, which are calculated after each model is fully estimated. 29

---

CHAPTER 3.   DATA & METHODOLOGY 30

---

CHAPTER  FOUR  PREVIOUS LITERATURE  Despite the subject of GARCH models being well documented, there are to the authors knowledge not many papers where GARCH models are used to forecast the volatility of the OBX. There is seemingly only one relevant academic paper on the subject, by Hyytinen (1999). This paper was however, written over 25 years ago, and examines a totally different period in financial markets. Two masters theses that attempt to forecast the volatility of the OBX, along with other Nordic markets were also found. Andersson (2020) compares the fore- casting accuracy of several of the GARCH models we use for our thesis, however the primary goal of Andersson (2020) is to use the results to perform arbitrage trading. Credit is due to this author for discussing the paper by Hyytinen (1999), as it was through the literature review in his thesis that the paper was found. There is also a promising thesis by Wennström (2014), where the volatility is attempted to be forecasted. The results for the out-of-sample tests are however inconclusive.  4.1   Hyytinen (1999)  Hyytinen (1999) examines the conditional volatility of stock returns in Finland, Norway, and Sweden during periods of financial liberalisation, macroeconomic turbulence, and banking crises. The study examines whether banking crises caused regime shifts in volatility and explores cross-country volatility spillovers. For the Norwegian index, data from 1983 to 1997 have been used. The paper estimates the vanilla GARCH model, EGARCH, along with the Threshold GARCH (TGARCH) model, which is a similar model to the GJR-GARCH model. To test for volatility spillovers, the variance equation is augmented with lagged squared residuals from other countries’ banking sectors, weighted by crisis-specific dummy variables.   This method assesses whether shocks in one country affect volatility in neighbouring markets.   In-sample goodness of fit for model perfor- mance is tested using the Schwarz Information Criterion. The results in Hyytinen (1999) imply that GARCH(1,1) is the best performing model, which is interesting considering the significant amount of theory presented in the paper arguing for a high degree of leverage effect in Nordic markets.   It 31

---

CHAPTER 4.   PREVIOUS LITERATURE is peculiar that the symmetric GARCH model is able to capture these effects better than the EGARCH and TGARCH models, which are specifically designed to capture the leverage effect. Additionally, the study finds evidence of significant cross-country volatility spillovers, particularly between Finnish and Swedish markets. Banking crises in- duced clear structural shifts in volatility, with peaks in volatility occurring after the crises were fully realized rather than serving as early indicators.  4.2   Andersson (2020)  Andersson (2020) models and forecasts volatility in Nordic equity markets, includ- ing Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Finland from 2015 to 2019. The author also examines the feasibility of arbitrage opportunities in the Finnish derivatives mar- ket through a trading strategy based on volatility forecasts. GARCH, EGARCH and GJR-GARCH models are used in the thesis. For the Nordics in general, the EGARCH is shown to be superior in terms of model fit.   The GJR-GARCH breaches non-negativity constraints and contrary to the results presented by Hyytinen, 1999, the symmetric GARCH is unable to account for the asymmetric properties of financial returns.   The EGARCH(1,1) is well suited for all markets, except for Norway, for which the ARMA(1,0)- EGARCH(1,2) is shown to be the best fit.  4.3   Wennström (2014)  Wennström (2014) evaluates the volatility forecasting performance of six models on Nordic equity indices, comparing in-sample fit and out-of-sample forecasting accuracy to determine which models are most effective for financial time series. The models used were Simple Moving Average, Exponentially Weighted Moving Average, ARCH, GARCH, EGARCH, and GJR-GARCH. The study focused on three Nordic equity indices: OMXS30 (Sweden), OMXC20 (Denmark), and OMXH25 (Finland), using daily data from 2002 to 2014.   The data was divided into a nine-year in-sample period and a two-year out-of-sample period. In-sample fit was assessed using AIC and BIC. Out-of-sample performance was evaluated using loss functions such as MSE and Percentage Squared Errors. No single model consistently outperformed others across all loss functions for out-of-sample forecasting. Results varied significantly based on the choice of eval- uation criteria. Additionally, while more complex models like EGARCH and GJR- GARCH provided better in-sample fits, they did not consistently lead to superior out-of-sample performance. 32

---

CHAPTER  FIVE  RESULTS & DISCUSSION  5.1   ADF Statistics  The results in table 5.1.1 indicate that the ADF test statistics for both the OBX and VIX are significantly lower than the critical values for the significance level of 1%. Additionally, the p-values for both variables are   <   0 . 0001 , which rejects the null hypothesis of a unit root at a 99% confidence level. We can therefore conclude that neither the OBX, nor the VIX exhibit unit roots, and that we are free to include them in the mean model of our GARCH models.  Table 5.1.1:   Table of ADF statistics   ADF τ   for unit root testing.   Statistically significant values with ADF statistic below -3.434 are considered stationary at a 99% confidence level.  Variable   ADF Statistic   P-value  OBX   -18.11   <   0 . 0001  VIX   -5.32   <   0 . 0001  5.2   AIC & BIC Statistics  Calculations for AIC and BIC can be observed in tables 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 below. Here we have chosen to assess lags up to order 5, as we can observe some autocorrelation at lag 5 in figure 2.2.3b, and therefore need to decide whether to include them in the model or not.   For both AIC and BIC, we see that the lowest value is for a GARCH model of order (1,1), as the complexity of higher order models with many lags does not seem to meaningfully capture more of the trend in the ARCH and GARCH processes than simple models with one lag. We can therefore conclude that simple models with one lag for   σ 2  t   and   ϵ 2  t   is the optimal choice, consistent with our initial theory from the PACF plot. 33

---

CHAPTER 5.   RESULTS & DISCUSSION  Table 5.2.1:   AIC values for various orders of ARCH and GARCH processes for OBX.   p   represents the number of lags for the GARCH processes   σ 2  t   , and   q  represents the number of lags for the ARCH processes   ϵ 2  t   . GARCH( p, q )   q   = 1   q   = 2   q   = 3   q   = 4   q   = 5  p   = 1   19209 . 99   19210 . 91   19212 . 47   19211 . 95   19213 . 62  p   = 2   19211 . 99   19210 . 34   19212 . 34   19212 . 16   19214 . 16  p   = 3   19213 . 99   19212 . 34   19216 . 47   19213 . 17   19213 . 14  p   = 4   19215 . 99   19214 . 34   19219 . 37   19215 . 17   19215 . 14  p   = 5   19217 . 99   19216 . 34   19218 . 34   19217 . 17   19216 . 79  Table 5.2.2:   BIC values for various orders of ARCH and GARCH processes for OBX.   p   represents the number of lags for the GARCH processes   σ 2  t   , and   q  represents the number of lags for the ARCH processes   ϵ 2  t   . GARCH( p, q )   q   = 1   q   = 2   q   = 3   q   = 4   q   = 5  p   = 1   19236 . 82   19244 . 44   19252 . 71   19258 . 90   19267 . 27  p   = 2   19245 . 52   19250 . 57   19259 . 28   19265 . 80   19274 . 51  p   = 3   19254 . 23   19259 . 28   19270 . 12   19273 . 53   19280 . 21  p   = 4   19262 . 94   19267 . 99   19279 . 72   19282 . 24   19288 . 91  p   = 5   19271 . 64   19276 . 69   19285 . 40   19290 . 94   19297 . 26  Based on the AIC and BIC calculations in tables 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, both the ARCH and GARCH processes can be optimally modelled as order one processes.   The variance models for the GARCH models are therefore given as GARCH(1,1):   σ 2  t   =   ω   +   αϵ 2  t − 1   +   βσ 2  t − 1 ,   (5.1a) EGARCH(1,1,1):   σ 2  t   =   exp     ω   +   α | e t − 1 |   +   δe t − 1   +   β   ln   σ 2  t − 1     ,   (5.1b) FIGARCH(1,1):   σ 2  t   =   ω   + [1   −   βL   −   (1   −   αL )(1   −   L ) d ] ϵ 2  t   +   βσ 2  t − 1 ,   (5.1c) GJR-GARCH(1,1,1):   σ 2  t   =   ω   +   αϵ 2  t − 1   +   δϵ 2  t − 1 I { ϵ t − 1 < 0 }   +   βσ 2  t − 1   (5.1d) Furthermore, based on equation 2.14, the mean model for the multivariate GARCH- VIX models is given as   r t   =   μ   +   γV IX t   +   ϵ t   . For the endogenous GARCH models with constant mean, the mean model is given as   r t   =   μ   +   ϵ t , as shown in equation 2.5. 34

---

CHAPTER 5.   RESULTS & DISCUSSION  5.3   Forecast Evaluation  The analysis of the errors across different GARCH model variations shows varied performance across models, as some models performed better than the rest. For the MAPE estimations in table 5.3.1, the FIGARCH-VIX shows the high- est performance, indicating the presence of long-memory in the variance. For the RMSE estimations in table 5.3.2, the GJR-GARCH-VIX model shows marginally higher performance than the FIGARCH-VIX model.   This indicates that while the FIGARCH-VIX model performs better in periods of low to moderate volatility as measured by the MAPE, the GJR-GARCH-VIX is more accurate when volatility is high, implied by the RMSE. This is an interesting observation, as it suggests that modelling the leverage effect is advantageous for high forecasting performance during market crashes.   This superior performance is intuitive, as these periods are associated with a high degree of panic selling by investors, and should therefore be able to modelled by the leverage effect. Determining which of these models are superior is a matter of preference, and in which way one would aim to use the model.   For general forecasting in most market conditions, the FIGARCH-VIX would be preferable, but risk-averse investors would possibly prefer to miss out on a small degree of overall model performance with the GJR-GARCH-VIX model, in return for better performance during high volatility periods. Notably, the standard GARCH model struggled to capture the nuances of the OBX market dynamics effectively.   It seems that a symmetric model is unable to account for long-memory and leverage effects that seem to be prominent in Norwegian markets. Similarly, the EGARCH model, despite its theoretical ability to account for the leverage effect, underperformed as well. This suggests that the approach taken by the GJR-GARCH model for estimating the leverage effect is more consistent with the volatility dynamics in Norwegian markets. Considering that the implied volatility measure in the VIX produces the most accurate models for both moderate and high periods of volatility, the inclusion of the VIX in the mean model definitely seems to optimise the model. These findings suggests more generally that there is a significant link between the volatility of US and Norwegian equity markets. Moreover, the forward-looking properties of implied volatility as measured in the VIX, strongly seem to be a leading indicator of future market volatility. It is important to reflect on the general levels for the error metrics.   On a general level, MAPE values of   >   50%   are not associated with accurate forecasts (Kasemset et al., 2014). However, it is also important to keep in mind that these forecasts consider values as far as 30 days into the future, with all the uncertainty that comes with it. An argument can be made, that a model with "only" a MAPE of 60% is excellent for a monthly forecast, which can perform consistently despite the high level of uncertainty. On the other hand, it is important to acknowledge that this kind of long term time series forecasting should not be implemented into a trading strategy directly.   That is to say, that because of the high MAPE, we should not use these results to place speculative bets on their own. Despite this, the results of these models are on the whole quite promising, and 35

---

CHAPTER 5.   RESULTS & DISCUSSION can give us a good indication on whether the volatility is likely to increase or decrease over the next month.  Table 5.3.1:   Table of MAPE values (in %) for each model at different folds, along with the mean value for each model. The model with the lowest mean value is considered to be the most accurate.  Models   Fold 1   Fold 2   Fold 3   Fold 4   Mean  GARCH(1,1)   55.69   68.87   69.90   63.94   64.60 EGARCH(1,1,1)   53.60   66.61   69.71   67.06   64.25 FIGARCH(1,1)   54.41   70.96   64.50   62.65   63.13 GJR-GARCH(1,1,1)   54.43   68.49   67.98   66.73   64.41 GARCH-VIX(1,1)   56.11   67.76   68.77   63.88   64.13 EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1)   57.13   66.64   72.01   65.29   65.27 FIGARCH-VIX(1,1)   54.80   70.08   63.48   62.70   62.77 GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1)   57.26   68.00   69.76   64.41   64.86  Table 5.3.2:   Table of RMSE values (in   σ 2 ) for each model at different folds, along with the mean value for each model. The model with the lowest mean value is considered to be the most accurate.  Models   Fold 1   Fold 2   Fold 3   Fold 4   Mean  GARCH(1,1)   4.2701   1.3141   0.9768   1.9810   2.1355 EGARCH(1,1,1)   4.8275   1.2870   0.9166   1.9100   2.2353 FIGARCH(1,1)   4.3828   1.3410   0.9705   1.9294   2.1559 GJR-GARCH(1,1,1)   4.2374   1.3538   0.9325   2.1791   2.1757 GARCH-VIX(1,1)   4.4046   1.2979   0.9662   1.9788   2.1619 EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1)   4.8627   1.2606   0.9277   1.8724   2.2309 FIGARCH-VIX(1,1)   4.5361   1.3232   0.9589   1.9292   2.1869 GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1)   4.2322   1.3033   0.9300   1.9911   2.1142  5.4   Model Coefficients  After selecting the best performing models from tables 5.3.1 and 5.3.2, we can now estimate the highest performing models on the entirety of our data and observe the coefficients and significance statistics. In this case, it is the FIGARCH-VIX model for the MAPE, and GJR-GARCH-VIX for the RMSE. 36

---

CHAPTER 5.   RESULTS & DISCUSSION  Table 5.4.1:   Estimated coefficients for the FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) model, retrieved from the model estimation in figure B.7 in appendix B.  Variance Model ( σ 2  t   )  Coefficient   Value   Std. Err.   P-value  ω   0.0421   0.0131   0 . 0001  α   0.2482   0.0541   <   0 . 0001  d   0.4553   0.0630   <   0 . 0001  β   0.5783   0.0813   <   0 . 0001  Mean Model ( r t )  Coefficient   Value   Std. Err.   P-value  μ   0.3798   0.0458   <   0 . 0001  γ   -0.0182   0.0028   <   0 . 0001  Table 5.4.2:   Estimated coefficients for the GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) model, re- trieved from the model estimation in figure B.8 in appendix B.  Variance Model ( σ 2  t   )  Coefficient   Value   Std. Err.   P-value  ω   0.0314   0.0071   <   0 . 0001  α   0.0309   0.0072   <   0 . 0001  δ   0.1173   0.0186   <   0 . 0001  β   0.8929   0.0135   0.0000  Mean Model ( r t )  Coefficient   Value   Std. Err.   P-value  μ   0.2689   0.0467   <   0 . 0001  γ   -0.0136   0.0028   <   0 . 0001  The parameter estimates in tables 5.4.1 and 5.4.2 demonstrate a high degree of statistical significance, evidenced by the relatively small standard errors compared to the magnitude of the coefficients.   This consistency in significance across all models suggests robust parameter estimation and reinforces the reliability of the models in capturing the dynamics of volatility for the OBX index. All parameters estimated in these models have p-values   ≪   0 . 01 , which makes them statistically significant, allowing us to interpret them with a high degree of confidence. We can empirically examine the effect of US implied volatility on the OBX by assessing the coefficients for our VIX variable   γ   in the mean model in tables 5.4.1 and 5.4.2. Here, we see that the coefficient is negative, which is consistent with our expectation of implied volatility being negatively correlated with market returns. Along with all other estimated coefficients,   γ   has a p-value of   <   0 . 0001   for the 37

---

CHAPTER 5.   RESULTS & DISCUSSION mean models of both GARCH models, allowing us to reject the null hypothesis that   γ   = 0   at a 99% confidence level. These results suggest that there is a strong relationship between the VIX and the OBX, and that the implied volatility of the S&P 500 does in fact affect the OBX through the mean models of the GARCH-VIX models.   Judging by the coefficients, there appears to be an approximately 1: -0.016 relationship between the VIX and the returns of the OBX. Furthermore, either the VIX, or an explanatory variable of the VIX, is an element in the vector of explanatory variables   x ′  t   from equation 2.1a, making it a deterministic variable for the returns of OBX. This is a significant discovery, considering that the VIX displays strong autoregressive properties observed in figure 2.5.2, and can therefore likely be forecasted. It should be mentioned that reliable forecasts could likely not be estimated through traditional AR models directly, as the VIX itself is heteroscedastic and therefore not weakly stationary, which is required for AR-type models. Despite this, the findings can potentially be used to form an argument against the efficient market hypothesis, as a robust prediction of the future value of the VIX could improve prediction accuracy of the future returns of the OBX. This would in turn imply that present information can predict future returns, contrary to the weak form of the efficient market hypothesis. Finally, the estimated GJR-GARCH-VIX model can also provide us with a nu- merical estimation of the leverage effect for the OBX. By considering the estimated coefficients in table 5.4.2, we can empirically determine the leverage effect through the value for   δ , as this is the coefficient for the asymmetrical term   ϵ 2  t − 1 I { ϵ t − 1 < 0 } . As  δ   = 0 . 1173 , negative returns introduce   0 . 1173 ϵ 2  t − 1   more volatility at time   t   than positive returns. 38

---

CHAPTER  SIX  CONCLUSIONS  From comparing the forecast from the different GARCH models, we see that the non-linear models successfully capture properties in the conditional variance which are not measured in the original GARCH model. That being said, all models show practical usefulness in terms of prediction accuracy, making none of the models directly unsuitable for variance forecasting. As the FIGARCH-VIX and GJR-GARCH-VIX models displayed the high- est performance, we empirically observe the effect of both long-memory and the leverage effect on conditional volatility. Specifically, the FIGARCH-VIX showed the highest performance overall, and the GJR-GARCH-VIX showed the highest performance during high-volatility periods.   These two models are therefore the GARCH model extensions that should be considered for forecasting the volatil- ity of the OBX. The univariate and multivariate versions of the GARCH and EGARCH models on the other hand, display weaker performance, and do not seem to capture the asymmetric properties of the volatility in an effective way. Judging by the superior performance of GARCH-X models with the VIX as an exogenous variable, we can conclude that there is significant cross-market cor- relation in volatility between the US and Norwegian stock market. Additionally, implied volatility seems to have some predictive properties for the true condi- tional volatility, as the inclusion of this measure improves the performance of our forecasts, confirming that implied volatility is forward-looking. Furthermore, the VIX is shown to be an explanatory variable of the daily returns of the OBX. Since the VIX itself is strongly serially correlated, we can therefore likely use estimated values for the VIX to predict weather returns will be positive or negative in the future, which would in that case disprove the efficient market hypothesis. Finally, it is important to recognise that these models have not only proven to be effective for prediction, but the coefficients in the models have also given us profound insights into how volatility behaves in the Norwegian stock market. The insights are a result of the transparency and high interpretability of the models, which could not have been obtained through a neural network. As complex black box machine learning algorithms are more and more prevalent in modern finance, the results in this thesis is a strong case for classical econometric models like GARCH models. 39

---

CHAPTER 6.   CONCLUSIONS As shown in this thesis, GARCH models are great examples of models which not only are deeply rooted in financial theory, but also work well for practical real world forecasting. In that sense, GARCH models bridge the theoretical world and the real world, providing investors with practical tools that offer insight into the behaviour of the asset in question, while also providing a significant empirical foundation for the implemented strategies.  6.1   Future Work  Given the successful application of various GARCH models in this thesis, further research could explore even more sophisticated volatility models.   Considering the effectiveness of non-linear models such as FIGARCH-VIX and GJR-GARCH- VIX, an exploration into newer and more complex variations such as component GARCH models might yield even more precise volatility forecasts. In light of the observed increase in performance by including the VIX as an exogenous variable in the mean model, a natural continuation of this thesis project would be to include it in the variance model itself. This could be done through polynomial ARMA models designed to match the FIGARCH or GJR-GARCH models, with an exogenous VIX term added directly into the variance model. Another potential direction one could explore from this thesis is the inclusion of estimated terms for the VIX or other volatility measure, in models which aim to forecast returns. In this thesis, we have seen both that volatility can be forecasted reliably, as well as a significant relationship between volatility and returns.   It would be interesting to examine whether an estimated VIX term can be used to increase the accuracy of returns estimations. This relationship would in that case be considered a strong argument against the efficient market hypothesis, and may potentially be very useful for traders and other short term market participants. Finally, as the models in this thesis have proven effective in reliably forecasting the conditional variance of equities, the variance models might be useful to include as estimated variables in other models with completely different goals than volatil- ity prediction. As these models effectively estimate the future market risk in real time, our GARCH models may improve complex models for both risk management or speculative trading strategies. 40

---

REFERENCES  Abadie, A., & Imbens, G. W. (2008). Estimation of the conditional variance in paired experiments.   Annales d’Economie et de Statistique , 175–187. Ait-Sahalia, Y., Fan, J., & Li, Y. (2013). The leverage effect puzzle: Disentangling sources of bias at high frequency.   Journal of financial economics ,   109   (1), 224–249. Andersson, J. (2020).   Forecasting volatility in nordic equity markets using non- linear garch-type models   [Master’s thesis, Hanken School of Economics]. Assaad, R. H., & Fayek, S. (2021). Predicting the price of crude oil and its fluc- tuations using computational econometrics: Deep learning, lstm, and con- volutional neural networks.   Econometric Research in Finance ,   6   (2), 119– 137. Baillie, R. T., Bollerslev, T., & Mikkelsen, H. O. (1996). Fractionally integrated generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity.   Journal of econo- metrics ,   74   (1), 3–30. Belkhouja, M., & Boutahary, M. (2011). Modeling volatility with time-varying figarch models.   Economic Modelling ,   28   (3), 1106–1116. Bera, A. K., & Higgins, M. L. (1993). Arch models: Properties, estimation and testing.   Journal of economic surveys ,   7   (4), 305–366. Bollerslev, T. (1986). Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity.  Journal of econometrics ,   31   (3), 307–327. Bollerslev, T. (1987). A conditionally heteroskedastic time series model for spec- ulative prices and rates of return.   The review of economics and statistics , 542–547. Bun, M. J., & Harrison, T. D. (2019). Ols and iv estimation of regression models including endogenous interaction terms.   Econometric Reviews ,   38   (7), 814– 827. Burnham, K. P., & Anderson, D. R. (2004). Multimodel inference: Understanding aic and bic in model selection.   Sociological methods & research ,   33   (2), 261– 304. Cboe. (2022, July). Cboe volatility index methodology. https://cdn.cboe.com/ api/global/us_indices/governance/VIX_Methodology.pdf 41

---

REFERENCES Chang, W., & Pant, V. (2003). The valuation of options in illiquid markets: A comparison of methods.   Available at SSRN 356160 . Cont, R. (2007). Volatility clustering in financial markets: Empirical facts and agent-based models. In   Long memory in economics   (pp. 289–309). Springer. De Prado, M. L. (2018).   Advances in financial machine learning . John Wiley & Sons. Devansh. (2023, September).   Why is deep learning called black box. why is it a problem?   [Accessed: 20.02.2025]. https://medium.com/nerd-for-tech/why- is-deep-learning-called-black-box-why-is-it-a-problem-43ac3d3ec24 Dias, R., Heliodoro, P., Teixeira, N., & Godinho, T. (2020). Testing the weak form of efficient market hypothesis: Empirical evidence from equity markets.  International Journal of Accounting, Finance and Risk Management ,   5   (1), 40. Eigner, P., & Umlauft, T. S. (2015). The great depression (s) of 1929-1933 and 2007-2009? parallels, differences and policy lessons.   Parallels, Differences and Policy Lessons (July 1, 2015). Hungarian Academy of Science MTA- ELTE Crisis History Working Paper , (2). Eliason, S. R. (1993).   Maximum likelihood estimation: Logic and practice   (Vol. 96). Sage. Engle, R. F. (1982). Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of united kingdom inflation.   Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society , 987–1007. Euronext. (2024, September). Obx total return index factsheet. https : / / live . euronext.com/sites/default/files/documentation/index-fact-sheets/OBX_ Total_Return_Index_Factsheet.pdf Euronext. (2025). Obx options quotes [Accessed: 13.01.2025. NOTE: This source is a live market overview of all OBX options traded, and is continuously changing]. https://live.euronext.com/nb/product/index- options/OBX- DOSL/settlement-prices FRED. (2023). What is fred? [Accessed: 15.01.2025]. https://fredhelp.stlouisfed. org/fred/about/about-fred/what-is-fred/ FRED. (2025). Vix price data chart [Accessed: 03.01.2025]. https://fred.stlouisfed. org/series/VIXCLS# Glosten, L. R., Jagannathan, R., & Runkle, D. E. (1993). On the relation between the expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks.  The journal of finance ,   48   (5), 1779–1801. Greene, W. H. (2012).   Econometric analysis   (Seventh Edition). Pearson. Hyytinen, A. (1999). Stock return volatility on scandinavian stock markets and the banking industry: Evidence from the years of financial liberalisation and banking crisis.   Bank of Finland Research Discussion Paper , (19). 42

---

REFERENCES IBM. (2024, December). What is overfitting? [Accessed: 13.01.2025]. https://www. ibm.com/think/topics/overfitting Investing.com. (2023). About us [Accessed: 15.01.2025]. https://www.investing. com/about-us/ Investing.com. (2025). Obx price data chart [Accessed: 02.01.2025]. https://www. investing.com/indices/oslo-obx Javed, F., & Mantalos, P. (2013). Garch-type models and performance of informa- tion criteria.   Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation ,  42   (8), 1917–1933. Kanyongo, W., & Ezugwu, A. E. (2023). Feature selection and importance of predictors of non-communicable diseases medication adherence from ma- chine learning research perspectives.   Informatics in Medicine Unlocked ,   38 , 101232. Kasemset, C., Sae-Haew, N., & Sopadang, A. (2014). Multiple regression model for forecasting quantity of supply of off-season longan.   CMU J. Nat. Sci. ,  13   (3), 391–402. KPMG. (n.d.). Model validation [Accessed: 13.01.2025]. https://kpmg.com/xx/ en/our-insights/risk-and-regulation/model-validation.html Leonardo, A. (2024a, November).   Mean absolute percentage error (mape)   [Ac- cessed: 13.01.2025]. https : / / www . statisticshowto . com / mean - absolute - percentage-error-mape/ Leonardo, A. (2024b, March).   Rmse (root mean square error)   [Accessed: 13.01.2025]. https://www.statisticshowto.com/probability- and- statistics/regression- analysis/rmse-root-mean-square-error/ Leonardo, A. (2024c, November).   T test (student’s t-test): Definition and examples  [Accessed: 13.01.2025]. https://www.statisticshowto.com/probability-and- statistics/t- test/#:~:text=A%20p%2Dvalue%20from%20a%20t, did% 20not%20occur%20by%20chance. McAleer, M., & Hafner, C. M. (2014). A one line derivation of egarch.   Economet- rics ,   2   (2), 92–97. McDonald, R. L. (2013).   Derivatives markets   (Third Edition). Pearson. Miami University. (n.d.). Lecture 5a: ARCH Models [Accessed: 13.01.2025]. https: //www.fsb.miamioh.edu/lij14/672_2014_s5.pdf NIST. (n.d.).   Measures of skewness and kurtosis . https : / / www . itl . nist . gov / div898/handbook/eda/section3/eda35b.htm Olsen, L. R. (2025). Multiple-k: Picking the number of folds for cross-validation [Accessed: 20.02.2025]. https://cran.r- project.org/web/packages/cvms/ vignettes/picking_the_number_of_folds_for_cross- validation.html#: ~ : text = When % 20performing % 20cross % 2Dvalidation % 2C % 20we , the % 20results%20of%20different%20settings. 43

---

REFERENCES Penn State University. (n.d.). Penn State: Statistics Online Courses [Accessed: 13.01.2025]. https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat510/lesson/2/2.2 Reitermanova, Z., et al. (2010). Data splitting.   WDS ,   10 , 31–36. SciPy. (2025, February). Optimization and root finding: Minimize [Accessed: 25.02.2025]. https : / / docs . scipy. org / doc / scipy / reference / generated / scipy. optimize . minimize.html#scipy.optimize.minimize Sheppard, K. (2024, November).   Bashtage/arch: Release 7.2.0   (Version v7.2.0). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14035889 Shrivastava, S. (2020).   Cross validation in time series   [Accessed 31.12.2024]. https: / / medium . com / @soumyachess1496 / cross - validation - in - time - series - 566ae4981ce4 Sucarrat, G. (2021). Garchx: Flexible and robust garch-x modeling. Tashman, L. J. (2000). Out-of-sample tests of forecasting accuracy: An analysis and review.   International journal of forecasting ,   16   (4), 437–450. University of Auckland. (n.d.). Chapter 3: Expectation and Variance [Accessed: 13.01.2025]. https://www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/~fewster/325/notes/ch3.pdf Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Courna- peau, D., Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., van der Walt, S. J., Brett, M., Wilson, J., Millman, K. J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A. R. J., Jones, E., Kern, R., Larson, E., . . . SciPy 1.0 Contributors. (2020). SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python.  Nature Methods ,   17 , 261–272. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2 Wennström, A. (2014).   Volatility forecasting performance: Evaluation of garch type volatility models on nordic equity indices   [Master’s thesis, Royal Institute of Technology]. Wooldridge, J. M. (2016).   Introductory econometrics   (Sixth Edition). Cengage Learning. Wu, S., Kempf, K., Atan, M., Aytac, B., Shirodkar, S., & Mishra, A. (2014). Extending bass for improved new product forecasting. Yeasin, M., Singh, K. N., Lama, A., & Paul, R. K. (2020). Modelling volatility influenced by exogenous factors using an improved garch-x model.   Journal of the Indian Society of Agricultural Statistics ,   74   (3), 209–216. Zaiontz, C. (n.d.).   Augmented dickey-fuller table   [Accessed: 25.01.2025]. https : //real-statistics.com/statistics-tables/augmented-dickey-fuller-table/ Zivot, E. (2021, June). Introduction to computational finance and financial econo- metrics with r. https : / / bookdown . org / compfinezbook / introcompfinr / maximum-likelihood-estimation.html 44

---

APPENDICES  45

---

APPENDIX A - FORECAST RESULTS FOR ALL MODELS  A1 - GARCH(1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.1:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 46

---

A2 - EGARCH(1,1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.2:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 47

---

A3 - FIGARCH(1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.3:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 48

---

A4 - GJR-GARCH(1,1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.4:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 49

---

A5 - GARCH-VIX(1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.5:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 50

---

A6 - EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.6:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 51

---

A7 - FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.7:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 52

---

A8 - GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Forecast Plot  (a)   Volatility forecast for fold 1.   (b)   Volatility forecast for fold 2.  (c)   Volatility forecast for fold 3.   (d)   Volatility forecast for fold 4.  Figure A.8:   The figures show estimated volatility plotted against real volatility. K-folds cross-validation is used with   k   = 4   folds. 53

---

APPENDIX B - ESTIMATED PARAMETERS FOR ALL MODELS  B1 - GARCH(1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure B.1:   Estimated parameters for the GARCH(1,1) model. 54

---

B2 - EGARCH(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure B.2:   Estimated parameters for the EGARCH(1,1,1) model.   Note that the coefficient   γ 1   in this figure is called   δ 1   in the thesis. 55

---

B3 - FIGARCH(1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure B.3:   Estimated parameters for the FIGARCH(1,1) model. Note that the coefficient   ϕ   in this figure is called   α   in the thesis. 56

---

B4 - GJR-GARCH(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure B.4:   Estimated parameters for the GJR-GARCH(1,1,1) model.   Note that the coefficient   γ 1   in this figure is called   δ 1   in the thesis. 57

---

B5 - GARCH-VIX(1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure B.5:   Estimated parameters for the GARCH-VIX(1,1) model. 58

---

B6 - EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure B.6:   Estimated parameters for the EGARCH-VIX(1,1,1) model.   Note that the coefficient   γ 1   in this figure is called   δ 1   in the thesis. 59

---

B7 - FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure B.7:   Estimated parameters for the FIGARCH-VIX(1,1) model.   Note that the coefficient   ϕ   in this figure is called   α   in the thesis. 60

---

B8 - GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) Estimated Parameters  Figure   B.8:   Estimated parameters for the GJR-GARCH-VIX(1,1,1) model. Note that the coefficient   γ 1   in this figure is called   δ 1   in the thesis. 61

---

APPENDIX C - USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  The author would like to acknowledge the use of artificial intelligence for gen- eral writing assistance and English vocabulary enhancement, spellcheck, coding assistance for both Python and LaTeX code, troubleshooting, Overleaf document setup, literature review assistance, and assisting in translating the Abstract from English to Norwegian. All AI tools have been used with care, and within the bounds of academic integrity. The specific AI tools used are listed in table C.1 below, along with a submitted form for declaration of AI tools.  Table C.1:   List of AI tools used in this thesis and their purpose.  Pupose   AI tool  Spellcheck   Writefull Writing assistance   Writefull and ChatGPT 4o Translation   ChatGPT 4o Literature review assistance   ChatGPT 4o and Connected Papers Programming assistance   ChatGPT 4o 62

---

APPENDIX D - GITHUB REPOSITORY  All code and data sets used in this document are included in the Github repository linked below. Further explanations are given in the README file.  Github repository link  •   https://github.com/estenmelhuus/NTNU-Masters-Thesis-GARCH-model -forecasting-for-OBX.git 63

---

®@ NTNU
Norwegian University of
Science and Technology