Investment Policy for Real Estate  Norway Ministry of Finance

---

Private Equity Mandates  2  General Summary  The Norway Ministry of Finance (“MoF”) has established a long term target allocation of five percent (5%) to real estate for the Government Pension Fund – Global (the “Fund”). This document sets forth the investment policy for the real estate portfolio. This Real Estate Investment   Policy   (the   “Policy”)   is   designed   to   ensure   that   Norges   Bank   (the   “Bank”) exercises prudent and careful action when investing and managing the Fund’s real estate portfolio.   This   Policy   is   also   intended   to   insure   that   the   Bank   at   all   times   acts   in   the interests of the overarching investment policies of the Fund. Use of this Policy provides assurance that investment risks associated with this segment of the portfolio are controlled. The global real estate portfolio shall improve the risk adjusted performance of the Fund’s overall investment portfolio by capturing the return and diversification benefits of the real estate asset class. The real estate investment portfolio of the Fund is to be invested, managed, and sold in a prudent manner for the sole benefit of Fund, in accordance with any applicable statutes. No investment strategy, vehicle or activity shall be permitted unless in compliance with this Policy and in compliance with any guidelines, as approved and adopted by MoF, and as amended from time to time. The Bank manages the real estate portfolio on behalf of the MoF. The Bank may use both internal and external managers. The Bank shall administer and oversee the real estate portfolio on a day to day basis. MoF has established the asset allocation and strategic objectives for the real estate portfolio as outlined in this statement of Policy. The design of the Policy ensures that investors, managers, consultants, or other participants selected by the Bank take prudent and careful action while managing the real estate portfolio. The purchase, management, and sale of all types of real estate investments shall be performed by internal and external professionals (managers)   who   are   monitored   and   evaluated   by   internal   investment   officers,   external consultants, and/or independent fiduciaries. The   real   estate   portfolio   shall   be   managed   taking   into   consideration   international   best practices.   This   Policy   shall   be   reviewed   periodically   to   determine   if   modifications   are necessary or desirable.

---

Private Equity Mandates  3  Table of Contents  1   Objectives   4  1.1   Strategic Objectives   4  1.2   Return Objectives   4  1.3   Risk Management Objectives   5  1.4   Other Objectives   5  2   Investment Policy Guidelines   6  2.1   Eligible Investment Vehicles   6  2.2   Separate Accounts   6  2.3   Joint Ventures   7  2.4   Commingled Funds   7  2.5   Public REITs and REOCs   8  2.6   Derivatives   8  2.7   Diversification Targets   8  2.8   Liquidity   13  2.9   Leverage   13  2.10   Transition Period   13  2.11   Discretionary Authority   13  2.12   Environmental Liability   14  3   Investment Selection and Monitoring Guidelines   15  3.1   Market Analysis   16  3.2   Due Diligence Analysis   17  3.3   Monitoring   18  3.4   Investment Termination   18  4   Reporting Guidelines   19  5   Annual Business Plan   21  6   Internal Guidelines   21  Appendix I – Glossary   22

---

Private Equity Mandates  4  1   Objectives  1.1   Strategic Objectives  The strategic   objectives   of the global real estate portfolio   in   the context   of the   overall portfolio are as follows: 1)   To provide diversification benefits in a multi asset portfolio 2)   To provide a hedge against inflation when compared to the fixed income asset class in the long run 3)   To provide an overall return that provides an illiquidity premium to traditional equities and fixed income MoF’s objective is to maximize the international purchasing power of the Fund over the long term, assuming a moderate level of risk. The strategic objective of the global real estate program   is   to   develop   a   diversified   portfolio   capable   of   achieving   investment   returns commensurate with the program’s targets. The portfolio will be invested in a diversified pool of real estate investments designed to capture the return and diversification (relative to the Fund’s equity and fixed income investments) benefits of the real estate asset class. The Fund shall also be invested so as to capitalize on its position as a long term investor, the size of its portfolio, and its ability to achieve global diversification.  1.2   Return Objectives  The real estate portfolio shall be managed over the long-term to accomplish the following goals on a net-of-fees basis: 1)   Meet or exceed, on a net-of-fees basis the IPD Global Index plus 150 basis points 1  2)   Exceed a minimum net-of-fees Real Internal Rate of Return (“IRR”) of 5% If the real estate portfolio is invested in public real estate, the total real estate benchmark shall be a blend of the public and private benchmarks. The public and private benchmark returns shall be combined using the actual weights of the market value of the public and private   real   estate   portfolios.   Public   real   estate   investments   shall   meet   or   exceed   a customized FTSE EPRA/NAREIT Global Real Estate Index plus 50 basis points.  1   The basis for the private real estate portfolio benchmark is the IPD Global Property Index in local currency + 150 basis points. This is based upon the premia being 30 basis points for Core (attributable to the permitted leverage), 200 basis points for Value-Added (attributable to leverage and investment strategy), and 400 basis points for Opportunistic (attributable to leverage and investment strategy).

---

Private Equity Mandates  5  On an investment level, Norges Bank shall attribute a custom benchmark to each individual mandate incorporating relevant factors like tax costs and risk factors, such as leverage, country risks and exposure to development and redevelopment.  1.3   Risk Management Objectives  The global real estate portfolio shall be managed over the long term to accomplish the following goals: 1)   Maintain an appropriate level of diversification across the dimensions (i) strategy; (ii) geographic region; (iii) investment manager; (iv) investment life cycle; and (v) vintage year 2)   Maintain an appropriate level of leverage. Sufficient consideration shall be given to the impact of debt financing for risk and return characteristics of the levered investments in total  1.4   Other Objectives  The global real estate portfolio shall be managed in such a prudent manner so as to comply with a series of ancillary but important objectives. The ethical guidelines of the Fund shall apply to the real estate portfolio.  The Government Pension Fund – Global shall follow and contribute to the development of  best practices in the integration of environmental considerations in the management of the  real estate portfolio. This will apply to the areas of energy efficiency, water consumption  and waste treatment in particular.  Norges Bank shall prepare and make public internal guidelines for the management of the  real estate portfolio which states how the ethical guidelines and environmental concerns are  integrated into the investment process, both through exercise of ownership rights and in  the due diligence process.

---

Private Equity Mandates  6  2   Investment Policy Guidelines  2.1   Eligible Investment Vehicles  For the Fund   to meet   its   objectives   in the real estate asset class, the   Bank   will select appropriate vehicles with structural aspects that provide for (i) maximum liquidity (within the context of the private markets) and control while mitigating risk; (ii) the highest level of accountability on the part of management; and (iii) the alignment of interests with MoF. For this reason, the ownership vehicles listed below are allowable. Real   estate   investments   may   include   direct   or   indirect   equity   investment   in   real   estate (including all rights and interests incident thereto) such as: (i) interests in corporations, partnerships, and other entities whose primary business is the acquisition, development, and operation of real property including publicly traded, or private real estate investment trusts   (“REITs”)   and   real   estate   operating   companies   (“REOCs”);   (ii)   participating   or convertible participating mortgages or other debt instruments convertible to equity interests in real property based on investment terms (and not merely by foreclosure upon default); (iii) options to purchase real estate, leaseholds, and sale-leasebacks; and (iv) all other real estate related securities such as lower or un-rated tranches of pre-existing securitized or structured debt instruments such as mezzanine debt, which have equity features. While the portfolio will primarily be exposed to developed real estate markets, investments in emerging markets and frontier markets   are permitted for the Opportunistic portfolio, given   appropriate   review   of   the   experience   and   strength   of   potential   investment management organizations; the real estate and capital markets; the investment practices and laws of countries selected, among other factors.  2.2   Separate Accounts  The   Bank   may   enter   into   discretionary   separate   account   relationships   with   real   estate investment managers, subject to pre-approved investment guidelines, whenever possible, and/or clearly defined investment strategies. This delineation is known in the real estate industry as “discretion in a box”, which means the manager shall have the authority and discretion   to   execute   a   particular   investment   strategy   only   so   long   as   each   and   every investment falls within the pre-approved guidelines for the portfolio. The Bank’s senior real estate investment   officer and/or   the Bank’s   CIO must approve any   deviations from   the approved guidelines. For this reason, investments shall be structured to facilitate alignment of interests between management and the Fund, management accountability, investment monitoring, and liquidity. In these separate accounts, the Fund shall have sole ownership of the asset(s) or may co- own   the   asset(s)   with   other   institutional   investors.   The   Bank   will   reserve   the   right   to

---

Private Equity Mandates  7  remove the real estate manager of any separate account, with or without cause, in a timely manner.  2.3   Joint Ventures  The Bank may invest with operating partners to execute defined investment strategies in which the operating partners have unique expertise. In these joint ventures, the operating partner shall also co-invest capital in the venture in an amount that is material to   the partner. The Bank shall strive to incorporate similar governance provisions into the joint venture agreements as are obtained in the Fund’s separate account relationships.  2.4   Commingled Funds  To   enable   greater   diversification,   to   reduce   risk,   and   to   provide   access   to   certain management teams only available via commingled investment vehicles, investments in the real estate portfolio shall be made in participation with other institutional investors. Real estate investments may be made in commingled vehicles including, but not limited to: (i) closed-ended funds such as group trusts, private REITs, limited liability companies, and limited partnerships; and (ii) open-ended funds (primarily   bank and   insurance company commingled accounts). Investments in closed-ended commingled vehicles shall have clearly articulated and viable exit strategies through which assets can be disposed of or liquidated upon termination of the investment and on an interim basis. The term of these investments shall also be limited to   no   more   than   ten   years   (subject   to   reasonable   annual   extensions   approved   by   the investors) and shall provide for a winding-up and orderly liquidation within this time period. Investment   time   horizons   of   certain   commingled   funds   may   extend   beyond   ten   years, provided   the   governance   provisions   allow   for   the   Fund   to   exit   the   vehicle   in   a   timely manner should the Bank so decide. Investment agreements for closed-ended commingled vehicles   shall   include   flexible   provisions   for   removal   of   management   by   investors   and interim liquidation of investor holdings. Open-ended   commingled   fund   investments   shall   include   flexible   redemption   provisions, though such provisions often do not provide investors with liquidity at times when it is most needed; therefore, it is critically important that such investments be made with the most proactive of managers. In addition, to the extent possible, investments in closed and open- ended commingled fund vehicles shall include an opportunity for investors to participate on advisory boards. To ensure adequate diversification, to avoid undue concentrations, and to reduce risk, no more than 10% of the Fund’s real estate portfolio shall be allocated to a single commingled fund in which the Bank does not exercise control over the Fund’s capital. For the purpose of

---

Private Equity Mandates  8  this   document,   “control   over   its   capital”   refers   to   the   ability   to   time   the   exit   from   an investment vehicle and/or the ability to terminate the manager of such vehicle.  2.5   Public REITs and REOCs  Investments   in   publicly-traded   vehicles   can   offer   the   total   real   estate   portfolio   greater liquidity over private market opportunities; however, they tend to be more correlated with equities than private real estate investments. These investments also offer tactical return opportunities with the potential to achieve higher nominal rates of return at a level of risk equal to or lower than the private markets. The maximum equity investment allocable to the   public   real   estate   portfolio   shall   be   25%   so   as   to   avoid   the   composite   real   estate portfolio becoming unduly correlated with the public equity markets.  2.6   Derivatives  Using indirect investments in real estate by purchasing derivatives is a comparatively new investment strategy, particularly in the European markets. It is anticipated that this market will expand dramatically over the next decade. Such instruments can be used proactively, especially in Core investment strategies, to manage a real estate portfolio. As this market becomes increasingly liquid, such instruments may be used by the Bank in its management of the Fund’s real estate portfolio.  2.7   Diversification Targets  Diversification within the real estate portfolio will reduce portfolio risk within the asset class as well as at the composite investment portfolio level. The investment approach requires the definition of a strategic   asset allocation   within the real estate asset class, which   is designed to provide a framework for long-term portfolio diversification across the following sectors: 1)   Geographic region - Europe, North America, Asia-Pacific and Rest of World 2)   Value creation strategy – Core, Value-Added, Opportunistic and public real estate 3)   Property sector – Office, Apartment, Retail, Industrial, Hotel and other 4)   Investment life cycle – development, repositioning, lease-up, stabilized and other 5)   Vintage year Allocations to each of these sectors should stay within certain predefined bandwidths so as to avoid undue concentrations.

---

Private Equity Mandates  9  2.7.1   Geographical Region  It is anticipated that the Fund shall have a global real estate portfolio. The Fund’s real estate portfolio shall be diversified across geographic regions. It is recognized these are broad ranges and from time to time the portfolio may gravitate above or below the targets. It is then anticipated that a plan will be developed to bring the portfolio back within the ranges over time.  Allocation bands in %   Min   Max   Target  Europe   25   50   38  North America   25   50   30  Asia-Pacific   10   30   25  Rest of World   0   15   7  These   regional allocations   are   generally   based   upon   the   weightings   of   the   approximate global investable universe as depicted in the chart below.  Europe 38% North America 30% Asia-Pacific 25% Rest of World 7%  It is recognized these weightings will shift over time, particularly with the growth of the Asia Pacific and Emerging Markets regions.  Other concerns may warrant a different target allocation. Given that Norway’s anticipated imports are skewed in favor of Western Europe, an overweight to Western Europe may be warranted. Further, an initial slight overweight to Western Europe will facilitate the initial monitoring of the portfolio. The weightings may also be affected by the taxes imposed by other countries on the Fund. Advantageous tax treaties may cause the Bank to tilt the portfolio towards countries where

---

Private Equity Mandates  10  the Fund is not subject to local income and capital gains taxes. Such policies would enhance the returns achievable in that country relative to others that impose such taxes on the Fund. “Europe” is defined to include Western European developed countries and not the Central and Eastern European (“CEE”) countries that are not yet members of the European Union. These CEE countries and countries comprising the former Soviet Union are considered to be included within the Rest of World category. North America is defined to include the United States and Canada. Central America and Latin America are included within the Rest of World category. Asia   Pacific   is   defined   to   include   developed   countries   in   the   region,   including   Japan, Singapore and Taiwan. China, India and other emerging markets in the region are included within the Rest of World category. Rest of World also includes the emerging markets referenced above as well as Africa and the Middle East. These weightings will shift over time. It is anticipated the Asia Pacific and Rest of World categories   will   increase   significantly   over   the   next   decade. The   allocation   bands   will be revisited   from   time   to   time   as   market   conditions   change   materially   and   modified accordingly.  2.7.2   Strategies  The real estate portfolio shall be diversified across strategies. The flexibility to incorporate a variety of investment concepts will enhance the probability that the portfolio will achieve its overall objectives. Further, this approach is consistent with the best practices adopted by global institutional investors in real estate.  Allocation bands in %   Min   Max   Target  Core 2   0   70   50  Value-Added   10   40   30  Opportunistic   5   30   20  The Core strategy is defined as follows: 1)   By property type: Generally, Core investments are limited to traditional property types, namely Office, Retail, Industrial, Multi-family and Hotel. The Net Asset Value (NAV) of a  2   Public real estate may be included within the Core allocation as an alternative mechanism of achieving Core returns. The aggregate real estate portfolio exposure to public real estate must not exceed 25%.

---

Private Equity Mandates  11  Core portfolio which is invested in property types other than the ones mentioned above may not exceed 10% of the total portfolio NAV. 2)   By   location:   The   underlying   assets   are   well-located   within   their   local   and   regional markets. 3)   By design: The underlying assets are of high-quality design and constructed according to international building standards acceptable to multi-national tenants. 4)   By degree of leasing: The Core portfolio is well-occupied which means that its vacancy rate does not exceed the Net Asset Value (NAV) weighted average of the vacancy rates of its underlying markets by more than 300 basis points. The NAV of a Core investment which   is   invested   in   properties   undergoing   re-development,   new   construction,   or significant re-leasing at the time may not exceed 10% of the total portfolio NAV. 5)   By return driver: Typical Core portfolio holdings have the preponderance of the total, long term return derived from rental income. The so-defined Core portfolio shall be well-diversified by property type and geography. Investments   within   the   Value-Added   and   Opportunistic   portfolio   will   generally   have expected returns and levels of risk greater than those of a typical Core investment. These investments   are   often   found   in   “niche”   opportunities   (e.g.,   emerging   markets,   urban redevelopment,   parking)   or   exist   because   of   inefficiencies   in   the   real   estate   or   capital markets.   The   Value-Added   and   Opportunistic   portfolios   may   contain   investments   where there   is   an   opportunity   to   enhance   property   values   through   significant   re-leasing, repositioning,   redevelopment,   development,   or   higher   levels   of   debt.   Investment   in   the Value-Added   and   Opportunistic   portfolio   shall   be   made   tactically,   based   on   prevailing market conditions at the time of investment. The Policy shall be modified from time to time to take advantage of new investment opportunities as they arise. Investments in the Value- Added and Opportunistic sectors typically have a shorter duration than those in the Core sector. Private debt investment strategies may be included within each of the Core, Value-Added and   Opportunistic   sector depending   on   the   level of   leverage used,   credit   quality   of   the investment, duration and liquidity among other factors.

---

Private Equity Mandates  12  2.7.3   Property Type  The   real   estate   portfolio   shall   be   diversified   across   different   property   types   that   shall approximately mirror the allocations in the all IPD Europe Index. 3  Allocation bands in %   Min   Max   Target  Office   15   40   35  Retail   10   30   30  Apartment   5   40   15  Industrial   0   15   10  Hotel   0   10   5  Other   0   20   5  2.7.4   Investment Life Cycle  The real estate portfolio shall be structured to be diversified by investment life cycles. The aggregate real estate portfolio exposure to development shall not exceed 30% in terms of gross fair market value of funded investments.  2.7.5   Vintage Year  The real estate portfolio shall be diversified across vintage years. The gross fair market value of funded investments of one vintage year in the real estate portfolio shall not exceed 30%. The real estate portfolio shall be initially invested over a minimum of three years up to the 5% allocation of the total portfolio to achieve vintage year diversity.  2.7.6   Investment Firms  The real estate portfolio shall be structured to be diversified by investment firms. No single manager   shall   manage   more   than   15%   of   the   gross   fair   market   value   of   funded investments in the real estate portfolio.  3   In Q2 2008, IPD announced the creation of the IPD Global Index. However, given the nascent aspect of the index, it has not yet been adopted by major institutions as the global benchmark for their real estate portfolios. Over time, as the index increases in size and develops an adequate track record of measuring performance, this benchmark should be considered as the overall benchmark for the real estate portfolio.

---

Private Equity Mandates  13  2.8   Liquidity  Real   estate   investments   shall   be   structured   to   include   clearly   defined   redemption   or termination provisions that offer investors a minimum level of liquidity, recognizing that these are private investments. In addition, whenever possible, investments shall include features that enhance liquidity to investors such as: (i) limited investment time horizons and holding periods; (ii) provisions for interim liquidation of investments; (iii) multiple exit strategies; and (iv) a readily tradable market for investor holdings.  2.9   Leverage  Total portfolio leverage shall on average not exceed 55% Loan to Current Market Value as of the end of the relevant reporting period. Leverage within the Opportunistic portfolio shall have   a   targeted   guideline   of   no   greater   than   75%,   based   on   the   aggregate   gross   fair market value of the funded investments in the Opportunistic portfolio. On the same basis, the   target   leverage   shall   not   exceed   65%   in   the   Value-Added,   and   40%   in   the   Core portfolio.  2.10   Transition Period  The Policy guidelines specified in this document shall not apply during the first three years of MoF’s initial investment period in the asset class, as it will take time for the overall portfolio   weightings   to   each   major   investment   strategy   (i.e.,   Core,   Value-Added   and Opportunistic) to be put into place. Initial investments could cause temporary imbalances compared to the longer term constraints in section 2.7-2.9. Further, during periods of substantial market corrections, it is possible that the portfolio may not comply with the targets referenced above. During these time periods, the Bank shall prepare a plan for coming into compliance over time and present such plan to the MoF.  2.11   Discretionary Authority  The approval and rejection decisions for real estate investments are delegated to the Bank with the following stipulations. The Bank shall follow general international best practices in crafting   an   investment   process   that   provides   appropriate   delegated   authority   to   both internal   and   external   managers.   Appropriate   checks   and   balances   shall   be   adopted   at various staff levels   in   terms of delegated authority. The Bank   shall prepare an   internal governance policy that shall clearly delineate the delegated authority and limits at various internal staffing levels and to external managers. Such policy shall be presented to the MoF for approval.

---

Private Equity Mandates  14  The Bank shall report quarterly to the MoF as to the outstanding capital commitments on both a funded and unfunded basis. Further, such reports shall include a report with regards to the use of subscription facilities and any other credit enhancements used by an external or internal manager with regards to any real estate investment or commingled vehicle. All real estate investments shall be subject to appropriate due diligence as defined in the Bank’s to be developed internal Real Estate Guidelines.  2.12   Environmental Liability  Subject to the following provisions and restrictions, the Bank will only prudently accept environmental exposure and potential liability in a manner consistent with overall industry standards   applicable   to   institutional   investors   acting   in   a   like   manner   under   similar circumstances. The Bank will not make direct investments in real estate with environmental conditions in the Core portfolio unless: (i) the value of the environmental risk can be quantified; (ii) the cost of remediation can be quantified; (iii) the environmental liability can be mitigated with measures already in place or to be implemented by the investment manager to effectively mitigate the risks to the Fund and result in an appropriate risk-adjusted rate of return; (iv) any such potential environmental liability is limited to the particular real estate investment; and (v) the real estate investment does not expose the entire Fund to any potential liability. All environmental risks will be appropriately mitigated by factors that may include, but are not limited to, specific remediation planning, environmental insurance, indemnifications by creditworthy   sellers,   agreements   with   regulatory   authorities,   and   the   legal   structure   of ownership. For investments held in separate accounts, the appropriate level of environmental risks to be   assumed   and   the   appropriate   mitigation   approaches   shall   be   detailed   in   the   to-be- developed Bank's internal Real Estate Guidelines. Environmental guidelines for investments in Commingled Funds and Joint Ventures will be addressed in the legal documents that control   the   activities   and   responsibilities   of   the   Managing   or   General   Partner   of   that investment opportunity.

---

Private Equity Mandates  15  3   Investment Selection and Monitoring Guidelines  The selection of real estate investments shall be guided by the "prudent expert" standard, embracing the prudent decision-making process typically employed by experts in the areas of real estate acquisition, development, operation, disposition, and portfolio management. A   market   analysis   shall be   performed   as   the   basis   for   a   decision   on   the   allocations   to individual geographic regions, value creation strategies, property sectors and investment life cycles. Furthermore, each equity sponsor shall be evaluated for their skills and their potential to create value. The criteria used shall include, but not be limited to: a.   Fit   with   the   program   Strategy,   Investment   Policy   and   Strategic   Plan,   and   within   the overall program b.   A unique strategy that is complementary, not competitive, with existing investments c.   Integrity of the manager, its employees, and other investors d.   Quality   of   manager’s   overall   corporate   governance,   management   of   the   partnership, including controls and reporting systems e.   Specific objectives f.   Manager’s relationship with and standing in the investment community g.   Manager’s relationship with limited partners h.   Nature of Value-Added involvement i.   Past financial performance of the individual investment professionals j.   Reasonable ratio of committed capital per partner k.   Appropriateness of terms and conditions  l.   Alignment of interests with limited partners

---

Private Equity Mandates  16  3.1   Market Analysis  Changing market conditions can dramatically affect the attractiveness of different segments within   the   overall   real   estate   market.   The   investment   process   requires   analyzing   these market conditions and their effects on the value drivers for each relevant segment. The emphasis shall be on creating a relative value framework in which global investment opportunities   can   be   evaluated.   Appropriate   risk   adjusted   returns   and   risk   premia   for various geographic regions and investment strategies shall be developed by the Bank and be used to allocate capital around the globe with the intent of accomplishing the long term strategic investment objectives of the Fund. A review of these factors shall be performed either by internal Bank investment officers or by external consultants at least on an annual basis with the goal of reviewing the return potential and relative attractiveness of the various market segments. General factors to be considered are outlined below.  3.1.1   Term-Structure of Interest Rates  The absolute level of interest rates and the shape of the yield curve impacts demand for properties in several ways. Most importantly, it is one of the two main factors determining the   cap   rate   for   properties.   Falling   interest   rates   typically   have   a   positive   impact   on property valuations. Therefore, falling inflation (expectations) also has a positive impact on real estate valuations. This is particularly the case in an environment where landlords are able to maintain net operating income (NOI) on their properties at their prevailing levels.  3.1.2   Real Estate Risk Premium  The cap rate spread, i.e. the difference between cap rates and interest rates, indicates the return   premium   investors   ask   to   receive for   taking   on   real estate   investment   risk.   The higher the premium, the more attractive real estate assets are for financial investors, both in absolute terms and relative to other asset classes.  3.1.3   Capital Market Flows  Real estate’s relative attractiveness versus other asset classes is probably the main factor determining capital flows into and out of the real estate market. Other factors such as the macroeconomic environment (e.g. GDP growth, currency fluctuations, political aspects) or investor specific aspects (e.g. asset allocation shifts, appetite for certain risk/return profiles, emotional factors) further impact these global flows.

---

Private Equity Mandates  17  3.1.4   Demand for Physical Space  This factor as well as the leasing market supply and the costs for operating properties (see below) are the main determinant for properties’ net operating incomes. The demand for physical   space   is   driven   by   such   factors   as   actual   and   expected   GDP   growth,   socio- demographic trends, globalization and other trends resulting from economic policies.  3.1.5   Lease Market Supply  The   vacancy   rate   describes   the   availability   of   property   space.   Construction,   which   is determined by its cost, the availability of land as well as regulatory and legal factors, has a positive   impact   on   vacancy   rates.   Areas   where   supply   is   constrained   are   often   more attractive for investors.  3.1.6   Property Operating Costs  Supply and demand determines the gross operating income real estate investors can earn. What is ultimately relevant for investors is their net operating income. Compared to the other factors, however, the operating costs are often less volatile.  3.1.7   Availability of Debt  The availability of debt is crucial for real estate investments which use higher leverage ratios such as most Value-Added and Opportunistic assets. Typically Core managers use up to 40% leverage, Value-Added firms 40% to 70% and Opportunistic firms more than 70%. As debt financing increases, Core and Opportunistic transactions become more attractive. In   contrast, as   banks   tighten   lending   practices   and   less   debt   is   available, opportunities often   appear   for   mezzanine   real   estate   investors.   Technically,   a   higher   credit   spread charged for debt is an indicator for lower availability of such financing. The lower the credit spread applied on the debt relative to the cap rate spread earned on a property investment, the more positive the impact of debt financing on a real estate equity investor’s return.  3.2   Due Diligence Analysis  The   Bank   shall   seek   to   retain   General   Partners   and   managers   that   possess   superior capabilities in the selection, pricing and management of real estate assets. The Bank shall apply internally accepted due diligence best practices in underwriting individual firms. With this objective in mind, prospective firms shall be evaluated for selection based on criteria including, but not limited to: 1)   The suitability of the organization’s investment strategy and ability to execute, relative to the Fund’s investment guidelines and objectives 2)   The quality, stability, integrity, and experience of the management team

---

Private Equity Mandates  18  3)   The   ability   and   willingness   of   the   organization   to   dedicate   sufficient   resources   and personnel to optimally manage the Fund’s investments 4)   The reasonableness of investment terms and conditions, including provisions to align interests of management and the Fund 5)   The appropriateness of management controls and reporting systems 6)   Commitment to responsible labor practices, environmentally sensitive investment and management   practices,   workplace   diversity,   and   community   involvement.   Preferred investments for the Fund will be those that exhibit the highest degree of management accountability and the greatest alignment of interests. As a matter of policy, the Bank will seek, but is not limited to, dedicated management teams that co-invest or have substantial   ownership   interest   in   the   investment   entity,   controlling   positions   with provisions for liquidity, and disclosure, as well as the mitigation of conflicts of interest  3.3   Monitoring  The   Bank   shall   monitor   and   evaluate   the   Fund’s   external   managers   and   investments continuously, based the stated objectives and on their performance relative to the defined benchmarks, and relative to the performance of firms managing similar investments in the marketplace.   The   Bank   shall apply   international best   practices   in   their   oversight   of   the Fund’s real estate portfolio. In   addition,   managers   shall   be   monitored   for   compliance   with   investment   guidelines, policies,   and   procedures   of   the   real   estate   portfolio,   and   other   contractual   provisions. Manager   performance   should   be   evaluated   over   meaningful   time   of   at   least   three   year intervals to ensure that performance is indicative of management’s efforts. Consideration shall also be given to the financial strength of the investment manager, the level   of   client   service   given   to   the   Fund   and   the   Bank,   as   well   as   changes   within   the managing   organization   such   as   the   continuity   of   personnel   assigned   to   the   Fund’s investments, among other items. As part of the MoF’s monitoring of the Bank, periodic reports regarding the performance of the   portfolio   and   compliance   of   the   Fund   with   adopted   policies   and   guidelines   shall   be presented   to   the   MoF.   Such   reports   are   addressed   in   Section   4   regarding   Reporting Guidelines.  3.4   Investment Termination  The   Bank   shall   seek   to   exit   investments   with   management   organizations   found   to   be deficient relative to the Bank's investment standards or the performance benchmark for that organization, or those who are expected to be deficient in that respect.

---

Private Equity Mandates  19  4   Reporting Guidelines  The Bank shall provide MoF with information, as requested by the MoF, that will enable the MoF to prudently monitor the investment performance and the Bank's management of the Fund. Such provided data shall be consistent with the best practices, as outlined below, utilized by other institutional real estate investors comparable to MoF. MoF shall provide the Bank an initial template with regards to the reporting format and portfolio   data metrics   that   shall   be   provided   to   MoF   on   a   quarterly   and   annual   basis. Further, MoF may retain additional third party service providers to assist in the monitoring of the   portfolio   and   the   Bank   shall provide   the   requested performance   information   and portfolio data metrics to such organization(s). The MoF shall, at a minimum, have an annual portfolio review with the Bank of the real estate portfolio's performance and compliance with overall investment guidelines, and such other interim meetings as are necessary to prudently monitor the Fund's performance. The Bank shall prepare an annual report and quarterly reports on the performance and characteristics, such as the diversification aspects, of the real estate portfolio. The reports shall seek to explain important contributions to the Fund’s performance. These reports shall also provide commentary as   to   whether any   aspects of the portfolio fall outside of the overall Policy guidelines for the real estate portfolio. The reports shall be made publicly available. The real estate management performance shall be evaluated as function of (i) the return of the Fund relative to the benchmark returns as applicable to the major sub-portfolios and (ii) the appropriate exercise of risk control. The return benchmarks are specified in section 1.2. The guidelines on diligent risk management are given through the Policy in section 2. The Fund's real estate investments shall be valued at least annually on a fair market value basis. Those investments held in separate accounts and/or direct joint ventures shall be externally appraised by qualified valuation firms, such as Chartered Surveyors or Members of the Appraiser Institute. For those investments in commingled vehicles in which the Bank does not directly control the valuation process, the Bank shall provide a summary for each such investment as to how the reported valuation was derived. If such a reported valuation was   derived   by   a   General   Partner   through   standards   other   than   International   Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as adopted by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB),   the   Bank   or   its   external   auditor   shall   provide   an   IFRS   opinion   as   to   the reasonableness of the valuation. In such a case, the Bank shall highlight that the General Partner valuation was not in accordance with IFRS, and shall possibly report the difference between the IFRS and the non-IFRS valuation to the MoF.

---

Private Equity Mandates  20  The Bank shall endeavor to ensure that investment valuations and returns reported to the MoF   are   calculated   in   accordance   with   industry   accepted   guidelines.   Presently,   these guidelines are generally established by Global Investment Performance Standards (“GIPS”). Within the real estate asset class, the overall real estate reporting guidelines are detailed in the most recent editions of the Real Estate Information Standards and the NCREIF Market Value Accounting Policy Manual. Present industry accepted practices generally call for investments in commingled vehicles to be valued, at a minimum, at the lower of cost of the partnership interest or market value. To   the   extent   that   managers   do   not   report   on   the   Fund’s   investments   in   a   manner consistent with these guidelines, the Bank shall work with these managers to obtain the most appropriate information. The Fund’s managers shall be notified at the inception of their   contracts   that   their   failure   or   inability   to   provide   accurate   and   timely   financial reporting may constitute grounds for termination.

---

Private Equity Mandates  21  5   Annual Business Plan  The real estate portfolio will be managed according to an annual business plan whose main business components will encompass an analysis of the investment environment, a review of the investment strategy, a review of the diversification ranges, a review of projected versus actual returns, and a resource allocation budget. Such plan shall be presented to the MoF annually and shall contain such information as is necessary for the MoF to evaluate the Bank’s performance and the performance of the Fund’s real estate portfolio.  6   Internal Guidelines  The Bank shall develop internal guidelines for the real estate portfolio based on the Policy guidelines. The internal guidelines shall comply with internationally recognized standards and methods, for issues such as valuation, measurement of return and management and control of risk. Prior to the implementation of investments in Real Estate, a due diligence process must have   been   completed.   Such   effort   is   required   to   include   an   assessment   against   the requirements   implied   by   the   Policy   guidelines   and   the   internal   guidelines,   and   to   be documented.

---

Private Equity Mandates  22  Appendix I – Glossary  APPRAISAL – An estimate or opinion of market value. APPRECIATION – The percentage change in the market value of a property or portfolio over the period of analysis. ASSET MANAGEMENT – The various disciplines involved with managing real property assets from the time of investment through the time of disposition. Proper asset management plans   and   policies   include   requirements   for   operating   and   capital   budgets;   property management;   leasing;   physical   property   analysis;   operational   and   financial   reporting; appraisal; audits; accounting policies; and asset disposition plans (hold/sell analyses). BENCHMARK – An   index derived from database information that allows for comparative performance evaluation within an asset class. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS – Expenditures that cure or arrest deterioration of property or add new improvements to prolong its life. CO-INVESTMENT   –   Investments   where   the   management   organization   has   a   capital investment and ownership share. COMMINGLED   FUND   –   A   term   applied   to   all   open-ended   and   closed-ended   pooled investment   vehicles   designed   for   institutional   tax-exempt   investors.   A   commingled   fund may be organized as a group trust, partnership, corporation, insurance company separate account, private real estate investment trust, or other multiple ownership entity. OPEN-ENDED FUND – A commingled fund with no finite life which allows continuous entry and   exit   of   investors.   An   open-ended   fund   typically   engages   in   ongoing   investment purchase and sale activities. CLOSED-ENDED FUND – A commingled fund with a stated termination date, with few or no additional   investors   after   the   initial   formation   of the fund.   Closed-ended   funds   typically purchase a portfolio of properties to hold for the duration of the fund and, as sales occur, typically do not reinvest the sales proceeds. CORE   INVESTMENT   -   Core   investments   are   expected   to   produce   market   level   returns commensurate with the property type in the country in which the asset is located also with a commensurate level of risk of the market. Income is expected to constitute a majority of the total return of Core Investments.   .

---

Private Equity Mandates  23  DISCRETION – The level of authority given to an investment manager over the investment and   management   of   a   client’s   capital   once   that   capital   is   allocated   to   the   investment manager. DIRECT INVESTMENT – An investment in which MoF has a direct ownership interest in a property or group of properties. FAIR MARKET VALUE – The highest price a property would bring if exposed for sale in the open market by a willing seller to a willing buyer with both parties being fully informed of all the uses and purposes to which the property is reasonably adaptable and available. FIDUCIARY – A person in whom MoF reposes, and the person accepts, a special trust and confidence involving the exercise of professional expertise and discretion. IPD   Global   Index   –   International   Property   Databank   maintains   the   largest   collection   of property returns on a global basis. GROUND LEASE – A lease of land only, not including any improvements on the property. HOTEL   –   May   include   budget,   economy,   mid-scale,   upscale,   luxury,   extended   stay   and independent hotels and any other properties that provide hospitality services. INCOME – The component of return derived from property or portfolio operations during the period of analysis. INDUSTRIAL   –   May   include   manufacturing,   R   &   D   Flex,   Office   Showroom,   Freight forwarding/logistics and warehouse distribution. INTERNAL   RATE   OF   RETURN   (IRR)   –   The   actual   (or   projected)   dollar-weighted   holding period return produced by an asset, calculated with consideration for all items of cash in and cash out. INVESTMENT MANAGER – A company that, by contractual agreement, provides property investment opportunities and/or property asset management services. JOINT VENTURE – A structure wherein MoF and a partner form a partnership to purchase and/or operate an investment, or investments. LAND - Undeveloped land parcels. LEVERAGE   –   The   use   of   borrowed   funds   to   increase   purchasing   power   and,   ideally,   to increase the profitability of an investment.

---

Private Equity Mandates  24  LIMITED PARTNERSHIP – A partnership with both general and limited partners in which the general   partner   manages   the   business   and   assumes   full   liability   for   the   partnership obligations   with   the   liability   of   the   limited   partners   generally   restricted   to   their   capital contributions. MULTI-FAMILY – May include high-rise, low-rise, and garden complexes of multiple rental units in an apartment building. May furthermore include condominiums, student-oriented complexes and senior rental housing with limited or no medical services. NCREIF INDEX – National Council of Real Estate Investment Fiduciaries Index; a property- level performance benchmark for institutionally owned real estate, calculated on a quarterly basis. NET ASSET VALUE (NAV) – Represents total assets at fair market value minus liabilities. NET OPERATING INCOME (NOI) – Rental and other income of a property, less operating expenses, but before the deduction of capital expenditures and debt service. NEW FIRM - Investment manager with whom MoF Real Estate has a contractual relationship of less than one year. NON-TRADITIONAL   PROPERTY   TYPE   –   Non-conventional   property   types   such   as   timber, senior housing, single family housing, natural resources, land, mini-storage, etc. OFFICE -May include multi-tenanted buildings in both central business district and suburban locations. Types of use in office buildings may include commercial banks, financial buildings that   serve   as   office   space,   owner-occupied   space   including   corporate   headquarters   and branch offices. Others, such as government administration buildings, medical offices and office R & D which is used primarily for office, may also be included. OPPORTUNISTIC   –   A   phrase   characterizing   an   investment   in   underperforming   and/or undermanaged assets typically purchased from distressed sellers, utilizing high levels of leverage with the expectation of near-term increases in cash flow and value. PROPERTY MANAGEMENT – The various functions that are performed at the property level in order to assure timely collection of rents, payment of expenses, and supervision of on- site activities. REAL   RATE   OF   RETURN   –   Yield   to   the   investor   after   adjusting   for   inflation   (typically determined by the Consumer Price Index).

---

Private Equity Mandates  25  RETAIL   –   May   include   neighborhood,   community,   regional,   super-regional, fashion/specialty, power, theme/festival, outlet and single tenant centers in which tenants sell goods and services. TOTAL RETURN – The sum of the income and appreciation returns. TRADITIONAL PROPERTY TYPE – Conventional property types such as Office, Multi-family Residential, Industrial, Retail and Hotel real estate; which are included within the NCREIF Index. VALUE- – A phrase commonly used by investment managers to describe a management approach to a property with the connotation that their skills will add value, which otherwise would not be realized.