The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics (2026) 72:640–665  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11146-025-10030-x  Abstract  This study investigates the use of diverse model selections in stacked generalization  to improve the predictive accuracy of Automated Valuation Models (AVMs). The  research focuses on three commonly used valuation techniques: the Comparable  Sales Method (CSM), the linear Least Absolute Deviation (LAD), and the nonlinear  XGBoost (XGB). A dataset consisting of 164,619 apartment transactions from Oslo  between 2008 and 2022 is utilized for testing, with 25% of the data used for out-  of-sample predictions. While the stacked model combining XGB, CSM, and LAD  achieves the best performance with a Median Absolute Percentage Error (MdAPE)  of 5.17%, the individual XGB model performs nearly as well, achieving an MdAPE  of 5.24%. Analysis reveals that stacking provides marginal improvements and  primarily relies on XGB predictions. However, the computational cost of stacking  raises questions about its practicality. The research highlights the limitations and  benefits of different housing valuation techniques and varying data sizes, offering  practical insights to enhance the performance of future AI-AVMs. By utilizing  explainable AI, this study contributes to a better understanding of how different  models collaborate and diverge, revealing their competitive advantages in house  price valuation.  Keywords   Forecasting   · Explainable AI   · AI-AVM   · Housing valuation   ·  Comparable sales method  JEL Classification   C55   · R21   · R31  Received: 18 September 2023 / Accepted: 18 August 2025 / Published online: 29 September 2025  © The Author(s) 2025  Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked  Generalization: Exploiting Explainable AI  Elias Bjørgve 1   · Are Oust 1   · Arne Johan Pollestad 1   · Cato Sandnes 1   ·  Ole Jakob Sønstebø 1  Ole Jakob Sønstebø  ole.j.sonstebo@ntnu.no  1   NTNU Business School, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Klaebuveien  72, Trondheim 7030, Norway 1   3

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… Introduction  “Valuation […] means the procedure and technique of estimating the value of  specific property   at a   stated time   and   place . ”   (Bonbright,   1937 , p. 10).  Traditionally,   real   estate   valuation   has   been   expensive,   time-consuming,   and  required expertise. However, Automated Valuation Models (AVMs) and AI-AVMs  have transformed the valuation of dwellings, making it accessible, instant, and free  for anyone. While AVMs have clear practical implications, they also highlight the  importance of understanding different real estate valuation techniques to enhance  AVM predictability. This paper focuses on three common valuation techniques: the  Comparable Sales Method (CSM), the linear Least Absolute Deviation (LAD), and the  nonlinear XGBoost (XGB). Our aim is to investigate whether stacked generalization  can enhance the predictive performance of AVMs in the housing market and to  leverage explainable AI to better understand valuation techniques.  Stacked generalization works by dynamically weighting the input from base  models based on their performances on a validation set (Wolpert,   1992 ). Each  base model captures unique patterns or insights from the data, and the metamodel  learns the optimal combination of these base model predictions to generate the final  output. By leveraging the diversity among the base models, stacked generalization  can potentially improve performance compared to using a single base model. This  approach benefits stakeholders such as real estate professionals, investors, and  homebuyers by providing a more robust and reliable prediction model. It also helps  us gain deeper insights into the benefits of different valuation techniques.  Machine learning techniques have been used in a variety of topics in the real estate  literature, such as the construction of house price indices (e.g., Calainho et al.,   2022 ;  Francke et al.,   2023 ; Xu & Zhang,   2022 ), valuation of curb appeal and architectural  styles (e.g., Johnson et al.,   2020 ; Lindenthal & Johnson,   2021 ; Wan & Lindenthal,  2023 ), and valuation of commercial real estate (e.g., Deppner et al.,   2023 ). However,  most studies have focused on integrating various machine learning methods to enhance  predictability and to compare traditional approaches with machine learning methods  in residential property valuation (e.g., Bogin & Shui,   2020 ; Simlai,   2021 ; Hjort et  al.,   2022 ; Ho et al.,   2021 ; Mayer et al.,   2019 ; Pace & Hayunga,   2020 ; Pérez-Rave  et al.,   2019 ; Sing et al.,   2021 ; Yacim & Boshoff,   2018 ; Yoshida et al.,   2022 ). Some  studies have investigated the use of stacked generalization to improve prediction  performance in real estate valuation (Birkeland et al.,   2021 ; Fourkiotis & Tsadiras,  2023 ; Graczyk et al.,   2010 ; Truong et al.,   2020 ). These studies have demonstrated  that models using stacked generalization not only enhance the stability of predictions,  but also outperform other models in terms of predictive accuracy. Our study aims to  extend the literature by investigating the implementation of stacked generalization  with methodically diverse modeling techniques. Specifically, we integrate the CSM,  a traditional appraisal method not commonly used in this context, along with the  LAD as a linear model and the XGB as a non-linear model. The selection of diverse  models ensures a wide range of approaches is considered and leverages the diversity  among base models. By incorporating the CSM into the stacked generalization 1   3  641

---

E. Bjørgve et al. framework, we explore a new direction in real estate valuation, shedding light on  the potential benefits and challenges associated with this procedure and different  valuation techniques.  We utilize a dataset comprising 164,619 apartment transactions in Oslo, covering  the period from 2008 to 2022. Our models are trained on 75% of the data and tested on  the remaining 25%. To address our research question, we develop AVMs for the three  individual models and feed their predictions into an XGB meta-model as part of the  stacked generalization process. This enables the creation of three additional stacked  models: (XGB   +   CSM), (XGB   +   LAD), and (XGB   +   CSM   +   LAD). We compare these  six models using various evaluation metrics and gain further insights by examining  feature importance and the discrepancy between predicted and actual values.  Additionally, we conduct tests to estimate the models’ out-of-sample performance  across smaller training sets representing different scenarios.  Our findings suggest that implementing stacked generalization with diverse models  leads to only a marginal improvement in prediction performance. Notably, the XGB  model performs robustly when used alone on the extensive housing market sample  from Oslo. Our analysis also reveals that the stacked models primarily rely on the  XGB base model for accuracy. However, the practicality of stacked generalization  is a concern due to its computational expense. Nonetheless, integrating XGB with  the CSM and LAD through stacked generalization yields a minor yet significant  improvement   across   all   performance   metrics,   reducing   the   Median   Absolute  Percentage Error (MdAPE) from 5.24 to 5.17%. When evaluating out-of-time test  samples, the overall performance drops as expected. However, the models’ relative  performance remains largely consistent, and our main conclusion holds despite the  somewhat less distinct results.  When examining models trained on smaller samples, we observe that the linear  LAD model improves its MdAPE performance until reaching a training sample size  of approximately 15,000 observations. Most of the prediction improvement for XGB  has already occurred around 20,000 observations, but it continues to show gradual  improvement with larger training samples. Not surprisingly, the accuracy of the CSM  heavily relies on a substantial amount of data. The CSM’s performance surpasses that  of the linear model when the training sample reaches around 30,000 observations.  This aligns with our expectations as the linear model fails to fully utilize the available  information, particularly regarding location and sales date. The CSM performs  poorly with small training samples because it relies on information from dwellings  that significantly deviate from the property being valued. As the training sample size  increases, the model can base its valuation on more similar properties, like XGB,  effectively leveraging the available information for each individual observation.  The remainder of this study is structured as follows: Sect.   2 establishes the  theoretical foundation through a literature review. Section   3 presents the data.  Section   4 illustrates the development of our AVMs, including stacked generalization,  individual models and the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) framework for  feature importance. Section   5 evaluates and discusses the models’ performance under  various conditions. Finally, Sect.   6 concludes. 1   3  642

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… Literature Review  Stacked Generalization  Stacked generalization is an ensemble learning technique that combines predictions  from multiple base models to create a final model with improved accuracy and  robustness. It was first introduced by Wolpert ( 1992 ) as a solution to the limitations  of single-model approaches in classification tasks. Breiman ( 1996 ) further refined the  technique for regression tasks and discovered that using diverse models led to better  results. Smyth and Wolpert ( 1997 ) extended the application of stacked generalization  to unsupervised learning tasks, expanding its potential beyond supervised learning.  Their work showcased the versatility of stacked generalization and contributed to  advancements in the field of machine learning, opening up new possibilities for its  utilization in various unsupervised learning tasks.  In real estate valuation, stacking has been implemented in several studies. Graczyk  et al. ( 2010 ) explored the effectiveness of six algorithms, including neural networks,  decision trees, linear regression, and support vector machines, as base models in  ensemble learning for real estate appraisal. They compared three meta-learners:  Additive Regression, Bagging, and Stacking, in terms of prediction accuracy.  The results showed that bagging was the most stable technique, while stacking  achieved the lowest prediction errors in most cases. Truong et al. ( 2020 ) focused on  predicting house prices in Beijing using three machine learning models: Random  Forest (RF), XGB, and LightGBM. They then compared the performance of these  individual models against a stacked model using stacked generalization. The findings  indicated that RF outperformed the stacked model on the training set and was the  best-performing model among the three. However, it was observed that RF tended  to overfit, while the stacked model demonstrated superior performance on out-of-  sample data, suggesting its potential for improved generalization.  Birkeland et al. ( 2021 ) proposed an Automated Valuation Model (AVM) for the  Oslo residential real estate market using a stacked ensemble approach. The ensemble  combined base models like Bagging Predictor (BP), Random Forest (RF), Extra Trees  (ET), and XGB, with another XGB model serving as the meta-model. The stacked  ensemble outperformed the individual models when evaluated on out-of-sample data,  with low MdAPE and a high percentage of predictions within 20% of the true values.  However, the authors acknowledged that the stacked generalization approach was  computationally expensive and might present challenges in interpreting the output  due to potential hidden factors influencing the model’s predictions. To gain further  insights, incorporating Linear Regression (Kansara et al.,   2018 ) and ElasticNet  Regression (Nnadozie et al.,   2022 ) alongside a subset of the aforementioned base  models can be beneficial. XGB emerged as the most effective individual model in  both studies, with the stacked model showcasing superior performance. Furthermore,  Fourkiotis and Tsadiras ( 2023 ) found that ensemble methods are valuable because of  their ability to harness the advantages of multiple individual algorithms. 1   3  643

---

E. Bjørgve et al. Comparable Sales Method and its Variations  CSM involves analyzing recent sales of comparable properties located in the same  area as the target property, and adjusting the sales prices based on differences  in various factors such as size, location, age, and other relevant features. The  traditional CSM model is effectively a constrained spatial autoregression (Pace &  Gilley,   1998 ). In its simplest form, commonly referred to as an expert algorithm, it  imitates the appraisal process undertaken by professional appraisers. The algorithm  finds comparables that match the target property in its characteristics and computes  the average value of their transaction price to estimate a prediction for the target  property. Examples of using such an approach in recent literature include Larraz et  al. ( 2021 ), Stang et al. ( 2022 ) and Trawiński et al. ( 2017 ), albeit with results that  were surpassed by more complex models. However, Stang et al. ( 2022 ) showed that  their Expert Function (EXF) was better suited to estimate the price in some of the  districts in Germany, especially those with fewer observations.  An alternative approach is to use a K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) algorithm to  calculate distances between the sample and target property to find a number (K) of  similar properties. Antipov and Pokryshevskaya ( 2012 ) and Valier ( 2020 ) obtained  more promising results using this approach compared to the simpler expert algorithm,  although the tree-based machine learning algorithms still yielded better results.  Building upon this approach, Oust et al. ( 2020 ) proposed a variation by incorporating  a K-means algorithm as a function of longitude, latitude and price per square meter  on the training set to generate more homogeneous artificial districts. Subsequently,  KNN was applied to the test set to classify dwellings based on the newly constructed  districts, employing the Haversine formula to measure distance. This resulted in  hedonic regressions that were spatially enhanced, effectively serving as a CSM.  Birkeland et al. ( 2021 ) utilized a similar method with the Haversine formula, known  as the comparable pricing method, to train ensemble learning submodels of an  AVM for estimating the value of different types of dwellings. The method involves  selecting geographically nearest transactions of the same type of dwelling as the  target property, with a ranking variable based on proximity, enabling the ensemble  methods to recognize recent sales of similar properties located in the near vicinity.  Hedonic Regression Models  One of the earliest and most widely used AVMs is the Hedonic Pricing Model (HPM)  proposed by Rosen ( 1974 ). This model is often used as a benchmark for testing other  models. Recent studies, such as the one conducted by Doumpos et al. ( 2021 ), have  shown that even simple linear models can be effective tools for building accurate AVM  systems, as long as they account for spatial effects. The study found that their locally  weighted linear regression models, including Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), Least  Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO), and LAD, performed well in  capturing spatial price variation compared to global and unweighted local approaches.  These models were also found to be easy to implement in a large-scale context and  required only a small data sample for model fitting. LAD was first introduced by  Koenker and Bassett Jr ( 1978 ) as an alternative to other more commonly used linear 1   3  644

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… regression models. Yoo ( 2001 ) found that the LAD model generates more robust  and accurate estimates of hedonic regression models compared to the conventional  OLS method. These findings demonstrate the advantages of using the LAD method  for HPM analysis and its potential to provide more reasonable results and increased  robustness for such models.  Boosting Techniques  Boosting is an ensemble technique first introduced by Schapire ( 1990 ). It involves  training decision trees sequentially, where each subsequent tree is fitted to improve  the errors made by the preceding trees. Later, this technique was developed further  and the AdaBoost method was introduced by Freund and Schapire ( 1997 ), which  was widely adopted in various machine learning applications. Gradient Boosting  Machine (GBM) was developed by Friedman ( 2001 ) as a generalization of AdaBoost  to   achieve   higher   accuracy,   handle   complex   interactions   between   variables,  and optimize any differentiable loss function. However, this algorithm can be  computationally expensive and can also lead to overfitting. To address these issues,  Chen and Guestrin ( 2016 ) implemented the eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGB)  algorithm. The model is a powerful and computationally efficient implementation of  the gradient boosting model. It is designed to address overfitting issues by imposing  regularization on the model structure, which limits its complexity and improves  generalization for out-of-sample data.  The XGB model has since been popular in   AVMs and is well documented in previous  literature. Kumkar et al. ( 2018 ) conducted a comparative analysis of four tree-based  ensemble methods, including XGB, to evaluate their efficiency in the appraisal of  property values. The results demonstrate that the XGB model outperforms the other  three models in terms of accuracy and predictive power. Stang et al. ( 2022 ) found  that due to its flexibility the XGB function achieved the highest overall accuracy  compared to the OLS regression, Generalized Additive Model (GAM), and their  EXF in their AVM for real estate properties. Hjort et al. ( 2022 ) used a large dataset  containing 126,719 observations where their variant of the XGB model achieved  the best results on 4 out of 5 of the performance metrics compared to other models,  where only their RF model performed better on median error percentage. Although  XGB has been shown to be a superior model in some contexts, it has been reported  to be outperformed by at least one other model in various comparisons (Birkeland et  al.,   2021 ; Law et al.,   2019 ; Sangani et al.,   2017 ; Wang et al.,   2020 ).  Data  Our   dataset   comprises   199,370   residential transactions in   Oslo,   spanning   the  period between 2008 and 2022, provided by the Norwegian PropTech company  Solgt.no. A significant majority of dwellings are identified as apartments, and by  concentrating our analysis solely on these, we gain the advantage of working with  a more homogeneous market, which is highly beneficial in the development of an  AVM. The dataset contains missing values in certain variables and the possibility 1   3  645

---

E. Bjørgve et al. of typographical errors in the source ads, requiring thorough attention during the  cleaning process. Consequently, the focus is on addressing these issues, with careful  consideration given to minimizing data loss when removing missing values. The  approach is partially influenced by Helgaker et al. ( 2022 ), but some modifications  are made to the process to retain a greater quantity of data. A summary of the full  cleaning process is provided in Table   1 .  As the dependent variable in our analysis, we use the natural log of the price per  square meter of living area. Following the approach of Oust et al. ( 2020 ), we include  both the actual transaction price and the common debt in the price to accurately  capture the total cost associated with acquiring a property, thereby providing a more  comprehensive representation of the property’s market value. 1   While city districts  are used to capture locational effects in the LAD model (see Fig.   1 ), we use latitude  and longitude coordinates for the XGB. To calculate the distances in the CSM, we  transform the coordinates from degrees to radians.  There is a considerable variation in prices across city districts. Figure   1   depicts the  distribution of the price per square meter based on latitude and longitude coordinates,  revealing a discernible trend: prices increase as the proximity to the city center  intensifies. The five districts Gamle Oslo, Grünerløkka, Sagene, St. Hanshaugen and  Frogner represent the inner city, where apartments are generally smaller due to their  central location. This leads to a relatively higher price per square meter compared to  1   Common debt, or shared debt, refers to the portion of a loan or mortgage collectively held by all members  of a housing cooperative or co-ownership. It finances common property expenses, such as building  maintenance and renovations. The market value includes both the transaction price and the common debt,  with the transaction price adjusting based on the level of common debt.  Data pre-processing   Observations  Original data   199,370  Apartment   174,815  Detached house   10,331  Row house   7,898  Semi-detached house   6,066  Other   260  Keep only apartments   174,815  Keep observations with sales price more than  500,000  174,598  Keep observations with living area larger than 9 m 2  and less than 300 m 2  174,484  Keep observations with build year newer than 1600   174,198  Keep observations with less than 10 bedrooms   165,077  Remove observations with faulty coordinates   164,674  Keep observations with floor less than 21   164,671  Keep observations with less than 4 bathrooms   164,654  Remove observations within the district “Marka”   164,652  Remove observations from 2007   164,636  Remove observations with negative age   164,619  Table 1   Data pre-processing  steps of the original dataset  The final dataset consists of  164,619 observations. 1   3  646

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… other areas in Oslo. Additionally, the figure demonstrates a modest increase in prices  for the western regions of Oslo, which can be attributed to the relatively greater  affluence compared to the eastern regions.  To facilitate the implementation of the linear LAD model, we partition the sales  date into its year and quarter components. For the CSM and XGB models, we  construct a new variable referred to as   Days elapsed , which records the number of  days that have elapsed since the first transaction in the dataset. A collection of binary  variables is used to provide insights into the apartment features. It is important to  note that their inclusion in an ad is optional, and different real estate agents may  have varying perspectives on which facilities to highlight as relevant. Therefore, a  degree of uncertainty is associated with the facility variables, and it is plausible that  some ads may lack certain facilities despite the underlying apartment possessing the  attribute. However, after assessing the quality and relevance of each variable, they  exhibit a distribution that appears reasonable. Additionally, we generate two new  binary variables: one indicating whether the apartment is situated on the fifth floor  or higher and lacks an elevator, and another indicating whether the apartment is  located in any of the five inner city districts and situated on the first floor. Apartments  Fig. 1   Districts of Oslo and price per m2 by location. Note: Axes refer to latitude and longitude, while  colors refer to relative prices. A small number of observations from the district “Sentrum”, which lacks  its own administration, were reallocated to the district “St. Hanshaugen”. (1) Alna, (2) Bjerke, (3)  Frogner, (4) Gamle Oslo, (5) Grorud, (6) Grünerløkka, (7) Nordre Aker, (8) Nordstrand, (9) Sagene,  (10) St. Hanshaugen, 11) Stovner, 12) Søndre Nordstrand, 13) Ullern, 14) Vestre Aker, 15) Østensjø,  *) Sentrum 1   3  647

---

E. Bjørgve et al. located on the first floor in the inner city are more likely to experience a negative  price impact due to increased pedestrian flow and limited privacy.  Renovation object   is a binary variable indicating whether certain keywords in  the ad title suggest that the apartment requires renovation. 2   Although there may be  some uncertainty associated with this variable, it is common to include this type of  information in the ad title to attract certain types of homebuyers. A total of 10,938  transactions (6.64%) are categorized as renovation objects, which likely capture most  apartments in need of renovation. Summary statistics are reported in Table   2 .  2   The variable is based on word recognition for the Norwegian equivalents of “remodeling” and “renova -  tion” in the ad title.  Table 2   Summary statistics  Panel A: Numerical variables   Mean   SD   Min   Max  Price per m 2   (NOK 1000)   65.17   23.29   12.50   278.33  Size (m 2 )   66.31   25.04   10.00   299.00  Age (years)   59.46   38.70   0.00   372.00  Bedrooms   1.78   0.76   1   9  Bathrooms   1.05   0.21   1   3  Latitude (degrees)   59.92   0.03   59.82   59.98  Longitude (degrees)   10.78   0.06   10.63   10.95  Latitude (radians)   1.05   0.00   1.04   1.05  Longitude (radians)   0.19   0.00   0.19   0.19  Days elapsed (1000)   3.49   1.38   0.00   5.68  Panel B: Binary variables   %   N   Binary variables (cont.)   %   N  Balcony   68.00   111,941   Østensjø   6.43   10,580  Garage   36.34   59,822   Sales year  Quiet   59.79   98,426   2008   1.56   2,563  View   35.00   57,614   2009   2.30   3,790  High floor and no elevator   5.05   8,321   2010   2.89   4,756  First floor and inner city   8.18   13,460   2011   4.81   7,919  Renovation object   6.64   10,938   2012   6.72   11,067  District   2013   7.18   11,812  Alna   5.88   9,677   2014   7.02   11,559  Bjerke   4.37   7,185   2015   7.84   12,906  Frogner   12.56   20,670   2016   7.19   11,837  Gamle Oslo   11.96   19,688   2017   7.49   12,333  Grorud   2.94   4,836   2018   8.36   13,763  Grünerløkka   13.36   21,985   2019   9.27   15,257  Nordre Aker   4.86   7,997   2020   9.53   15,689  Nordstrand   4.78   7,867   2021   10.16   16,731  Sagene   11.54   19,002   2022   7.67   12,637  St. Hanshaugen   8.77   14,443   Sales quarter  Stovner   2.58   4,257   Q1   22.93   37,752  Søndre Nordstrand   2.47   4,066   Q2   30.44   50,116  Ullern   3.83   6,304   Q3   25.14   41,384  Vestre Aker   3.68   6,062   Q4   21.48   35,367  The variable   Days elapsed   counts the days that have elapsed since the first transaction in the sample. 1   3  648

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… Methodology  To prepare for the construction of predictive models, the dataset is divided into a  training set and a test set using random allocation, with a 75/25 split. This allocation  ensures that the models have access to a substantial amount of data for training,  while also providing a sufficiently large sample size for evaluating their performance.  The training and test sets comprise 123,464 and 41,155 observations, respectively.  By utilizing different models, we aim to capture a wide range of features and  relationships within the data, and to assess the relative strengths and weaknesses in  each of the models.  The Base Models  CSM Model  The KNN algorithm serves as the fundamental methodology in our CSM model. We  employ KNN for its scalability, allowing us to extract valuable information from  the full sample, in contrast to other CSM approaches that typically involve filtering  and constraining the study to a smaller sample. This approach involves identifying  a set of K neighboring apartments that are most similar to the apartment in question  and using them to estimate the target value, assuming that properties with similar  features are likely to have similar values. The traditional CSM procedure involves  making adjustments to the features of nearby sales to calculate the target value,  much like how appraisers assess property values in real life. However, in this  study’s approach to CSM, the required adjustments are made through the selection  process of the K nearest neighbors. Therefore, our CSM procedure approximates the  traditional approach.  The KNN algorithm calculates the multidimensional distance between each  property using the Euclidean distance formula, as defined in Eq.   ( 1 ).  d   ( x, y ) =  √ ∑   n i =1 w i   ×   ( x i   −   y i ) 2   (1)  The data points to be compared are represented by   x   and   y , the feature values of  the data points along each of the   n   dimensions are denoted by   x i   and   y i , and the  weights given to each dimension are denoted by   w i . The Euclidean distance metric is  particularly useful in situations where the calculation must consider multiple features  beyond just the spatial location. In our CSM model, we use 13 dimensions. In addition  to the temporal ( Days elapsed ) and spatial dimensions ( Latitude   and   Longitude   in  radians), these include   Size (ln) ,   Age (ln) ,   Bedrooms ,   Bathrooms   and a set of seven  binary feature variables:   Balcony ,   Garage ,   Quiet ,   View ,   High floor and no elevator ,  First floor and inner city , and   Renovation object .  A limitation of the distance calculation described above is its sensitivity to scale  and inability to prioritize features based on their importance. To address this, we  first standardize the dataset to eliminate the effects of scaling. Additionally, to ensure  that more important variables have a greater influence on the distance calculation, 1   3  649

---

E. Bjørgve et al. we apply weights to the standardized features. These weights are derived from  the coefficients of a simple OLS model fitted to the standardized training sample. 3  Features with larger coefficients are assigned higher weights, effectively amplifying  their impact on the distance metric.  After calculating the distances, the KNN algorithm identifies the K nearest  neighbors. To determine the optimal value for K, we employ grid search, a  hyperparameter tuning technique, testing values ranging from 1 to 20 and utilizing  mean absolute error (MAE) as the performance evaluation metric. Our experiments  reveal that K   =   10 is the optimal value, resulting in the lowest MAE. The 10 nearest  neighbors are then used to estimate the natural logarithm of price per square meter by  obtaining the weighted average of their values. This weighting is done with regards  to the multidimensional distance, so that more similar neighbors are weighted higher.  LAD Model  We use the linear LAD method, which is equivalent to a median regression, instead  of the more traditionally used OLS, due to its robustness in the face of outliers within  the dataset, as noted by Yoo ( 2001 ). One potential issue with OLS estimations is  the powerful influence of extreme values, as the loss function minimizes squared  prediction errors. The LAD model mitigates this issue by minimizing absolute  prediction errors, assigning relatively less weight to outlying observations. Following  the standard hedonic model widely used in the real estate literature, the LAD model  estimates the marginal impact of a set of   K   independent variables,   X k , on the natural  logarithm of square meter price,   ln   ( P i ) , of an apartment,   i , as presented in Eq.   ( 2 ).  ln   ( P i ) =   β   0   +   ∑  k β   k X k,i   +   ∑  t  ∑  q   γ   t,q  ( Year t   ×   Quarter q  )  +   ∑  d δ   d District d   +   ∑  k  ∑  d η   kd   ( X k,i   ×   District d ) +   ∑  k  ∑  t ψ   kt   ( X k,i   ×   Year t ) +   ϵ   i  (2)  The predictors,   X k , include S ize (ln) ,   Age (ln) ,   Bedrooms ,   Bathrooms ,   Balcony ,  Garage ,   Quiet ,   View ,   High floor and no elevator ,   First floor and inner city , and  Renovation object .  To capture temporal and spatial variations, the model includes year-quarter fixed  effects,   γ   t,q  ( Year t   ×   Quarter q  ) , and district fixed effects,   δ   d District d . Given  that the sample period spans 15 years and covers 15 districts, it is plausible that price  dynamics vary over time or across different districts. To address this, we interact the  predictor variables   X k   with both the district and year. These interactions enable the  3   The weights given to each dimension, i.e., the coefficients of the OLS fitted to the standardized training  sample, are the following, in ranked order:   Sales time   (0.3257),   Size   (0.2707),   Latitude   (0.2415),   Longi -  tude   (0.2415),   Bathrooms   (0.0432),   Renovation object   (0.0402),   Bedrooms   (0.0363),   Age   (0.0276),   First  floor inner city   (0.0263),   Garage   (0.0103),   High floor no elevator   (0.0070),   Quiet   (0.0064),   View   (0.0058),  and   Balcony   (0.0029). The weights assigned to latitude and longitude are obtained by mean encoding  the district variable, transforming it into a location variable, and then using it in the OLS regression after  standardization. 1   3  650

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… effects of the predictors to vary spatially and temporally, providing greater flexibility  in modeling localized and time-sensitive price dynamics. For the full in-sample  estimation, please refer to Table   5   in the Appendix.  XGB Model  XGB operates by incorporating decision trees into a model iteratively, with each  subsequent tree aiming to rectify errors made by previous trees. During training, the  XGB model optimizes a loss function that measures the disparity between predicted  and actual values (Chen & Guestrin,   2016 ). It uses gradient descent to update the  weights of the decision trees and minimize the loss function by adjusting parameter  values. To address overfitting, XGB employs regularization techniques by adding  penalty terms to the objective function during training. These techniques discourage  the model from fitting noise in the dataset and penalize model complexity. For further  technical details, we follow the approach in Chen and Guestrin ( 2016 ).  To minimize MAE, which is chosen as the loss term for the objective function, and  optimize performance, we utilize grid search and 5-fold cross-validation. Through  grid search, we systematically train and evaluate the XGB model using various  hyperparameter values within a predefined grid. This allows us to explore multiple  combinations of hyperparameters and identify the best values for each parameter. By  leveraging the 5-fold cross-validation, we ensure robustness and reliable estimation of  model performance. The input variables in the XGB model are   Days elapsed ,   Latitude ,  Longitude , S ize (ln) ,   Age (ln) ,   Bedrooms ,   Bathrooms ,   Balcony ,   Garage ,   Quiet ,   View ,  High floor and no elevator ,   First floor and inner city , and   Renovation object .  Stacked Generalization  Stacked generalization exploits the strengths of the base models by combining them  in a meta-model, which is trained on a new dataset consisting of predictions from  the individual base models along with the XGB base model input variables. We  use another XGB model as the meta-model based on its capability to handle a large  number of features and capture non-linear relationships between input features and  the target variable. It has also been proven well suited for this purpose in previous  literature (Birkeland et al.,   2021 ). The stacking process is visualized in Fig.   2 .  To prevent overfitting in the stacked ensemble, we perform a 5-fold cross-  validation for each base model by dividing the original training set into training folds  and a validation fold. This allows us to train and evaluate the ensemble multiple  times on different subsets of the data, ensuring that the models are not overfitting to  a particular subset. Once the meta-model is trained, it is used to make predictions on  a holdout test sample. We analyze three different meta-models from combinations of  the base models: XGB   +   CSM, XGB   +   LAD, and XGB   +   CSM   +   LAD.  The three individual models and the three stacked models are evaluated by  R-squared ( R 2 ), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), Mean Absolute Percentage Error  (MAPE), Median Absolute Percentage Error (MdAPE), and Percentage Prediction  Error (PPE). To evaluate feature importance, we utilize the SHapley Additive  exPlanations (SHAP) framework (Shapley,   1953 ; Strumbelj & Kononenko,   2010 ), 1   3  651

---

E. Bjørgve et al. following Lundberg and Lee ( 2017 ). SHAP values assign an importance score to  each feature by measuring its contribution to a specific model prediction. Based on  cooperative game theory, SHAP values uniquely satisfy desirable properties such  as local accuracy, consistency, and missingness, making them a unified measure  of feature importance across various models (Lundberg & Lee,   2017 ). Feature  importance plots provide a global view of how features influence model predictions by  ranking them based on their average SHAP values across all predictions. In contrast,  beeswarm plots display the distribution of SHAP values for each feature across all  predictions, with each dot representing a single prediction. Beeswarm plots show  not only the magnitude of feature importance but also the variability and direction of  influence, with color indicating the feature value. However, obtaining SHAP values  for non-linear or non-tree-based models, such as our CSM with a KNN algorithm,  presents computational challenges. To address this, we employ randomly drawn  background and test samples consisting of 300 and 100 observations, respectively, to  estimate feature importances. Comparisons with the entire dataset for both LAD and  Fig. 2   The process of stacked generalization. Note: We use a 75/25 split for training and test samples 1   3  652

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… XGB models consistently yield similar variable rankings. Therefore, we consider our  reduced random sample representative of the entire dataset, allowing for comparison  across all models.  An   alternative   to   the   stacked   generalization   approach   is   Bayesian   Model  Averaging (BMA), a probabilistic framework that addresses model uncertainty by  averaging over a set of candidate models, with each model weighted by its posterior  probability (Hoeting et al.,   1999 ). While BMA offers theoretical advantages, such  as comprehensive uncertainty quantification, it has practical limitations, including  computational intensity and sensitivity to prior assumptions, particularly in large  model spaces (Hoeting et al.,   1999 ; Steel,   2020 ). Furthermore, studies have shown  that stacked generalization can outperform BMA when the true data-generating  model is not included in the candidate set (Clarke,   2003 ; Yao et al.,   2018 ).  However, by choosing stacked generalization, we forgo BMA’s ability to provide  a full posterior distribution, which is a powerful tool for uncertainty quantification  (Steel,   2020 ). To address this limitation, we compute the Automated Valuation  Model Uncertainty (AVMU) alongside standard performance metrics. Following the  methodology of Pollestad et al. ( 2024 ), AVMU is defined as the average standard  deviation of the estimated 90% prediction intervals for each model. This metric  complements traditional performance metrics by providing both insights into model  accuracy and a quantification of prediction uncertainty.  Importantly, these uncertainty estimates are generated ex-ante, without reference  to actual sales prices in the test set. Initial heuristic uncertainty measures are derived  using the direct loss estimation approach outlined in Pollestad et al. ( 2024 ) and  are subsequently calibrated to match the standard deviations of error distributions  using a conformal prediction framework. This approach enables the construction of  prediction intervals for each AVM, including complex “black-box” models, with the  resulting averages forming the AVMU metric. While AVMU provides an average  measure for interpreting model uncertainty, the individual prediction intervals vary  across homes, reflecting differences in uncertainty for specific predictions.  Results and Discussion  Model Performance in Out-of-Sample Prediction  Table   3   shows the performance of the individual and stacked models. Among the  individual models, XGB performs best on all performance metrics, followed by CSM  and LAD. When introducing stacked generalization, we observe that the combination  of XGB and CSM performs only marginally better than the individual XGB, while  the combination of XGB and LAD actually performs worse. The combination of all  three base models seems to be the best overall, outperforming the other models on all  metrics, except for a tie on PPE(50). However, the differences between the individual  XGB and the three stacking combinations are only marginal. This indicates that the  LAD and CSM models fail to bring any new valuable information that is not already  covered by the XGB. 1   3  653

---

E. Bjørgve et al. To provide a more illustrative representation, Fig.   3   displays the distribution  of relative prediction errors. The results indicate that XGB outperforms CSM and  LAD, exhibiting a narrower error distribution and a higher proportion of errors  within the dashed lines (+/- 20%), implying a superior model. The three stacked  models appear nearly identical, exhibiting a distribution pattern similar to that of  XGB alone, suggesting that the stacked models are predominantly reliant on the  XGB algorithm. Overall, we observe that the XGB model performs exceptionally  well on its own, raising the question of whether stacked generalization is worth the  added complexity and resources required for training and prediction.  Figure   4   portrays   the   SHAP   values   derived   from   all   models,   offering   a  comprehensive overview of each variable across the models. As the models use  distinct features to represent time, location, and size, we have aggregated the SHAP  values to facilitate comparison.  Table 3   Comparison of model performance  Models   R 2   RMSE   MAPE   MdAPE   PPE(10)   PPE(20)   PPE(50)   AVMU  CSM   0.9038   0.1124   8.36   6.51   69.15%   92.95%   99.78%   10.46%  LAD   0.8780   0.1266   9.25   7.22   64.18%   90.60%   99.74%   11.41%  XGB   0.9393   0.0893   6.69   5.24   78.46%   96.63%   99.91%   8.36%  (XGB   +   CSM)   0.9399   0.0889   6.66   5.21   78.69%   96.69%   99.91%   8.33%  (XGB   +   LAD)   0.9388   0.0897   6.71   5.25   78.32%   96.57%   99.91%   8.40%  (XGB   +   CSM   +   LAD)   0.9403   0.0886   6.63   5.17   78.90%   96.73%   99.91%   8.31%  R 2   and RMSE are calculated using the log-transformed observed and predicted values, while MAPE,  MdAPE, PPEs, and AVMU are calculated after reverting values to their original scale (Price per m 2 ).  Highlighted numbers indicate best performance.  Fig. 3   Distribution of relative prediction errors Note: The dashed vertical lines mark the +/- 20% range 1   3  654

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… The   Sales time   feature is the most influential variable across the models, followed  by   Location   and   Size . However, for the CSM,   Location   and   Sales time   switch  ranks. Notably, the CSM and LAD models diverge significantly from the others in  terms of variable weighting. While the top three variables remain consistent with  the other models, LAD assigns lower importance to   Sales time   and   Location , and  0%   10%   20%   30%   40%   50% High floor no elevator Quiet First floor inner city Renovaon object Bathrooms Balcony Garage View Bedrooms Age Size Locaon Sales me mean(|SHAP value|) in % (Average relave impact on model output) CSM   LAD   XGB   XGB + CSM   XGB + LAD   XGB + LAD + CSM  Fig. 4   Mean absolute SHAP values in percent from all models. Note: This figure shows the mean  absolute relative SHAP contribution of various variables across different models. For the stacked mod -  els, which use predictions from base models as inputs, the contributions of individual variables are  determined by decomposing the SHAP values of the base models and weighting them according to  each base model’s influence within the stacked ensemble. The time feature incorporates all categori -  cal variables pertaining to year and quarter fixed effects for the LAD model, whereas CSM and XGB  employ the   Days elapsed   variable. The location feature encompasses all categorical district variables in  the LAD model, while XGB employs latitude and longitude, and CSM employs latitude and longitude  represented in radians. All other variables are common for all models 1   3  655

---

E. Bjørgve et al. higher importance to   Size . Conversely, CSM emphasizes   Sales time   and   Location  more strongly, while assigning less importance to   Size . Although overall feature  importances are lower, similar deviations are observed for variables such as   Age ,  Bedrooms ,   View ,   Balcony , and   Bathrooms . The variable   High floor and no elevator   is  consistently ranked as the least important across all models.  Beeswarm plots from each model are found in Fig.   7   in the Appendix. The  stacked models heavily rely on the predictions from their base models, with XGB  predictions consistently dominating the SHAP value ranges, suggesting that XGB  provides the strongest signal in the ensemble. Meanwhile, the contribution of LAD  in stacked models is relatively small, indicating that its inclusion offers limited  added value.  Model Performance at District Level  Our investigation also involved the identification of any potential patterns across  districts. Figure   5   shows the average absolute error rate in each district, with a darker  shade indicating a smaller prediction error. Our findings suggest that the predictive  models perform better in the eastern region of Oslo compared to the western region.  Fig. 5   Absolute percentage error per district from all models 1   3  656

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… One possible explanation for this result is that apartments in the eastern region are  more homogeneous, mostly consisting of apartment complexes with similar sizes and  prices, while the western region possesses more variation due to the generally higher  income levels. Additionally, our results reveal that micro-location is a critical factor  when predicting prices, which may explain why the LAD model performed poorly.  Notably, the prediction errors observed in the XGB model and the three stacked  models are very similar, further substantiating the effectiveness of the XGB model.  Model Performance with Different Sample Sizes  To gain a deeper understanding of how the different valuation techniques as well  as the stacking perform under different data sizes, we conduct additional tests to  simulate such scenarios. Our objective is to evaluate the models’ ability to generalize  well to new data with fewer observations and determine their adaptability to limited  or scarce data. A model’s adaptability to smaller datasets reflects its robustness and  flexibility, which are essential qualities given that real-world scenarios often require  dealing with data constraints. The nature of the test is essentially a stress test for the  models, evaluating their capabilities to adapt to less-than-ideal circumstances.  Previous research, such as Stang et al. ( 2022 ), has shown that traditional methods  may outperform the XGB model in areas with limited observations, suggesting that  the XGB model may be more sensitive to information constraints compared to the  CSM and the LAD model. Thus, we aim to investigate how our models perform  out-of-sample on a variety of smaller training sets, which represent a wide range of  potential scenarios. To achieve this, we begin with the original training set of 123,464  observations and systematically halve its size ten times, reducing it incrementally to  as few as 121 observations (   ∼ 0.1% of the original training sample). To minimize the  influence of randomness, we maintain a constant test set size of 41,155 observations  throughout the experiment. Figure   6   illustrates how the MdAPE differentiates across  the various sizes of training data.  All models show improvement in MdAPE as the training set grows, but their rates  of improvement vary. LAD starts with the worst performance at small training sizes  and improves rapidly but plateaus after around 15,000 observations. CSM improves  steadily but remains the least accurate model until about 30,000 observations, where  it overtakes LAD. In contrast, XGB consistently outperforms both LAD and CSM,  achieving the lowest MdAPE among the base models. Notably, CSM and XGB  continue improving at a similar rate with larger training sets, albeit with diminishing  returns.  The stacked models consistently outperform the individual models, illustrating  the benefit of combining predictions. Among them, XGB   +   CSM performs best for  smaller training sets (up to about 7,000 observations). However, with larger training  sets, the fully stacked model slightly outperforms or matches the performance of  XGB   +   CSM. By contrast, XGB   +   LAD performs worse than the other stacked  models and is often comparable to the individual XGB. Interestingly, the inclusion 1   3  657

---

E. Bjørgve et al. of LAD in stacked models appears to contribute negatively for larger training sets,  as evidenced by the slightly worse performance of the fully stacked model compared  to XGB   +   CSM. Although stacked models perform best overall, their advantage  over the individual XGB diminishes after around 2,000 observations, suggesting  that CSM and LAD provide little additional value in stacked generalization. Similar  trends are observed in the other evaluation metrics, mirroring those seen with  MdAPE. 4  A possible reason for XGB’s sustained precision could be its ability to leverage  a greater amount of information about each individual property compared to LAD,  specifically in terms of location and time of sale. While CSM also incorporates these  factors better than LAD, it becomes vulnerable when the sample size is too small.  This may be due to its reliance on having enough similar properties to the target  property.  Model Performance in Out-of-Time Prediction  One potential drawback of our models is that they do not incorporate out-of-  time predictions, which are necessary to evaluate their performance in real-world  4   These results are available from the authors upon request.  3% 5% 7% 9% 11% 13% 15% 121   241   482   965   1,929   3,858   7,716   15,433   30,866   61,732   123,464 MdAPE Size of training dataset CSM   LAD   XGB (XGB + CSM)   (XGB + LAD)   (XGB + CSM + LAD)  Fig. 6   MdAPE for training samples of varying sizes. Note: The training samples range from 121 obser -  vations (~   0.1%) to the original training sample of 123,464 observations (100%). For training sets with  fewer than 1,000 observations, interactions in the LAD model are excluded to mitigate the challenges  posed by high dimensionality in a limited training sample. The horizontal axis is logarithmic (base 2) 1   3  658

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… situations. Since the models have varying reliance on time and considering that we  generally want to use the most recent data possible in a valuation setting, we conduct  an out-of-time prediction by selecting the 2,000 most recent observations as the test  sample. Meanwhile, the training set consists of the first 162,619 observations. The  results are presented in Table   4 .  As expected, the overall performance drops somewhat when dealing with the time  perspective. However, we observe that the models’ relative performance remains  mostly consistent to the models trained with the original approach, as shown in  Table   3 . XGB remains the best-performing individual model, while LAD continues  to fall short. Furthermore, the two stacked models with CSM still outperform the  individual XGB across all evaluation metrics, whereas the XGB   +   LAD model fails  to offer any improvement over XGB. While the results are somewhat less distinct,  our main conclusion remains consistent. A notable difference, however, is that  stacking only XGB and CSM now yields slightly better results on MdAPE, PPE(20),  and AVMU compared to stacking all three models. This suggests that LAD may  contribute negatively to out-of-time predictions.  Conclusion  This study develops and compares six distinct Automated Valuation Models  (AVMs) to assess their prediction accuracy in the housing market. By employing  stacked generalization, which combines methodologically diverse models, we aim  to enhance the overall performance of the ensemble. Furthermore, we analyze how  each model within the stacked ensemble function to identify the most suitable  conditions for their use.  Our findings confirm that XGBoost (XGB) stands out as the most effective  individual model, consistently demonstrating robust results when tested on an  extensive sample from Oslo’s housing market. Notably, XGB achieves a low  median   absolute   percentage   error   (MdAPE)   of   5.24%.   Significantly,   when  incorporating the Comparable Sales Method (CSM) and our linear model,  Table 4   Comparison of model performance in out-of-time prediction  Models   R 2   RMSE   MAPE   MdAPE   PPE(10)   PPE(20)   PPE(50)   AVMU  CSM   0.8301   0.1163   8.99   6.90   66.75%   91.05%   99.55%   10.98%  LAD   0.8008   0.1259   9.94   8.02   59.50%   88.90%   99.80%   11.68%  XGB   0.8988   0.0897   7.10   5.66   75.70%   95.80%   99.90%   8.89%  (XGB   +   CSM)   0.9011   0.0887   6.81   5.26   78.10%   96.30%   99.90%   8.89%  (XGB   +   LAD)   0.8961   0.0909   7.18   5.65   75.95%   95.65%   99.90%   8.96%  (XGB   +   CSM   +   LAD)   0.9013   0.0886   6.79   5.28   78.20%   96.25%   99.90%   8.96%  The test set comprises the 2,000 most recent observations. R 2   and RMSE are calculated using the log-  transformed observed and predicted values, while MAPE, MdAPE, PPEs, and AVMU are calculated  after reverting values to their original scale (Price per m 2 ). Highlighted numbers indicate best  performance. 1   3  659

---

E. Bjørgve et al. Least Absolute Deviation (LAD), through stacked generalization, we observe  improvements across all evaluation metrics, with MdAPE decreasing to 5.17%.  While the overall performance expectedly drops in out-of-sample predictions,  the models’ relative performance remains largely consistent, and our main  conclusion holds.  When analyzing models trained on smaller samples, we find that the linear  LAD model improves its MdAPE performance up to a training sample size of  approximately 15,000 observations, after which it plateaus. XGB achieves most  of its prediction improvement by around 20,000 observations but continues to  show gradual gains with larger training samples. As expected, the accuracy of  the CSM heavily depends on having a substantial amount of data. CSM surpasses  the performance of the linear LAD model once the training sample reaches  approximately 30,000 observations. This outcome aligns with expectations, as  the linear model struggles to fully utilize available information, particularly for  location and sales date. With smaller training samples, CSM performs poorly due  to its reliance on data from properties that significantly differ from the one being  valued. As the sample size grows, CSM, like XGB, is able to base valuations on  more similar properties, thereby better leveraging the available information for  each observation.  Overall, this study highlights the effectiveness of non-linear machine learning  AVMs;   while   stacked   generalization   does   improve   prediction   accuracy   by  combining diverse models, the XGB model performs exceptionally well on its  own, raising the question of whether stacked generalization is worth the added  complexity and resources required for training and prediction. Nevertheless, this  approach builds a bridge between conventional appraisal practices, such as the  Comparable Sales Method employed by appraisers in the field, and traditional linear  valuation models like hedonic models, as well as non-linear valuation techniques  driven by machine learning. It also underscores the strengths and limitations of  each individual model, which are all firmly rooted in the foundational concept  of sales comparison, providing insights into the optimal conditions for their use.  These findings have practical implications for real estate professionals, investors,  and homebuyers, contributing to a deeper understanding of valuation techniques in  the housing market. 1   3  660

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… Variables   Coefficients  Size (ln)   −0.5627 ***  (0.0017)  Age (ln)   −0.0291 ***  (0.0004)  Bedrooms   0.1108 ***  (0.0007)  Bathrooms   0.0531 ***  (0.0008)  Balcony   −0.0023 **  (0.0009)  Garage   0.0416 ***  (0.0009)  Quiet   −0.0256 ***  (0.0008)  View   0.0817 ***  (0.0008)  Renovation object   −0.1395 ***  (0.0015)  High floor no elevator   0.0484 ***  (0.0017)  First floor inner city   −0.0504 ***  (0.0014)  Year × Quarter FE   Yes  District FE   Yes  Year × Housing attributes   Yes  District × Housing attributes   Yes  Observations   123,464  R 2   0.8780  Table 5   LAD in-sample Estima -  tion results  The coefficients represent  the effect on the natural  logarithm of price per m 2  from the LAD model. The  model has fixed effects for  the interaction between year  and quarter, as well as city  district fixed effects. The model  also includes the interaction  between year and the  remaining housing attributes,  and the interaction between  district and the other attributes.  This allows for price dynamics  to vary across time and space.  Standard errors in parentheses.  * Significant at the 1% level.  ** Significant at the 5% level.  Appendix   Table   5 ; Fig.   7 . 1   3  661

---

E. Bjørgve et al. D A L M S C  M S C + B G X B G X D A L + M S C + B G X D A L + B G X  Fig. 7   SHAP beeswarm plots for all models 1   3  662

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… Acknowledgements   We are indebted to Solgt.no for providing the data. We would like to thank the  participants at the St. Gallen Research Seminar and FinTech AI in Finance and Banking Conference in  Trondheim for their valuable comments.  Funding   Open access funding provided by NTNU Norwegian University of Science and Technology (incl  St. Olavs Hospital - Trondheim University Hospital). No funds, grants, or other support was received. The  authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. The study conception and design  were contributed to by E. Bjørgve, A. Oust, C. Sandnes, and O.J. Sønstebø. Material preparation, data  processing, analysis, and writing were carried out by these authors along with A.J. Pollestad. All authors  have read and approved the final manuscript. The data that support the findings of this study were obtained  from Solgt.no and are not publicly available due to proprietary restrictions.  Declarations  Ethical Approval   Not applicable.  Competing Interests   There are no competing interests.  Consent to Participate   Not applicable.  Consent to Publish   Not applicable.  Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,  which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long  as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative  Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this  article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line  to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use  is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission  directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit   h  t  t  p  :  /  /  c  r  e  a  t  i  v  e  c  o  m  m  o  n  s  .  o  r g  /  l  i  c  e  n  s  e  s  /  b  y  /  4  .  0  / .  References  Antipov, E. A., & Pokryshevskaya, E. B. (2012). Mass appraisal of residential apartments: An application  of random forest for valuation and a CART-based approach for model diagnostics.   Expert Systems  with Applications ,   39 (2), 1772–1778.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.08.077  Birkeland, K., D’Silva, A. D., Füss, R. A., & Oust, A. (2021). The predictability of house prices: Human  against machine.   International Real Estate Review, 24 (2), 139–183.  Bogin, A. N., & Shui, J. (2020). Appraisal accuracy and automated valuation models in rural areas.   The  Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics ,   60 (1–2), 40–52.  Bonbright, J. C. (1937).   Valuation of property . McGraw Hill.  Breiman, L. (1996). Stacked regressions.   Machine Learning, 24 , 49–64.  Calainho, F. D., van de Minne, A. M., & Francke, M. K. (2022). A machine learning approach to price  indices: Applications in commercial real estate.   The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics .  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11146-022-09893-1  Chen, T., & Guestrin, C. (2016). Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In: Proceedings of the 22nd  acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. 785–794.   h  t  t  p  s  :  /  /  d  o  i  .  o  r g  /  1  0  .  1 1  4  5  /  2  9  3  9  6  7  2  .  2  9  3  9  7  8  5  Clarke, B. (2003). Comparing Bayes model averaging and stacking when model approximation error can -  not be ignored.   Journal of Machine Learning Research ,   4 (Oct), 683–712.  Deppner, J., von Ahlefeldt-Dehn, B., Beracha, E., & Schaefers, W. (2023). Boosting the accuracy of com -  mercial real estate appraisals: An interpretable machine learning approach.   The Journal of Real  Estate Finance and Economics , 1–38. 1   3  663

---

E. Bjørgve et al. Doumpos, M., Papastamos, D., Andritsos, D., & Zopounidis, C. (2021). Developing automated valuation  models for estimating property values: A comparison of global and locally weighted approaches.  Annals of Operations Research ,   306 , 415–433.   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03556-1  Fourkiotis, K. P., & Tsadiras, A. (2023). Comparing Machine Learning Techniques for House Price Pre -  diction. In: Maglogiannis, I., Iliadis, L., MacIntyre, J., Dominguez, M. (Eds.) Artificial Intelligence  Applications and Innovations. AIAI 2023. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Tech -  nology, vol 676. Springer, Cham.   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34107-6_23  Francke, M., Rolheiser, L., & Van de Minne, A. (2023). Estimating census tract house price indexes: A new  spatial dynamic factor approach.   The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics (3).   h  t  t  p  s  :  /  /  d  o  i  .  o  r g  /  1  0  .  1  0  0  7  /  s  1 1 1  4  6  -  0  2  3  -  0  9  9  5  7  -  w  Freund, Y., & Schapire, R. E. (1997). A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an appli -  cation to boosting.   Journal of Computer and System Sciences ,   55 (1), 119–139.  Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine.   The Annals of  Statistics .   https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1013203451  Graczyk, M., Lasota, T., Trawiński, B., & Trawiński, K. (2010). Comparison of bagging, boosting and  stacking ensembles applied to real estate appraisal. In Intelligent Information and Database Systems:  Second International Conference, ACIIDS, Hue City, Vietnam, March 24–26, 2010. Proceedings,  Part II 2. 340–350.  Helgaker, E., Oust, A., & Pollestad, A. J. (2022). Adverse selection in iBuyer business models—don’t buy  lemons!   Zeitschrift Für Immobilienökonomie .   https://doi.org/10.1365/s41056-022-00065-z  Hjort, A., Pensar, J., Scheel, I., & Sommervoll, D. E. (2022). House price prediction with gradient boosted  trees under different loss functions.   Journal of Property Research ,   39 (4), 338–364.   h  t  t  p  s  : /  /  d  o  i .  o  r g  /  1  0  .  1  0 8  0  /  0  9 5  9  9  9  1 6  .  2  0  2  2 .  2  0  7 0  5  2  5  Ho, W. K., Tang, B. S., & Wong, S. W. (2021). Predicting property prices with machine learning algo -  rithms.   Journal of Property Research, 38 (1), 48–70.  Hoeting, J. A., Madigan, D., Raftery, A. E., & Volinsky, C. T. (1999). Bayesian model averaging: A tutorial  (with comments by M. Clyde, David draper and EI george, and A rejoinder by the authors.   Statistical  Science ,   14 (4), 382–417.  Johnson, E. B., Tidwell, A., & Villupuram, S. V. (2020). Valuing curb appeal.   The Journal of Real Estate  Finance and Economics ,   60 , 111–133.  Kansara, D., Singh, R., Sanghvi, D., & Kanani, P. (2018). Improving accuracy of real estate valuation using  stacked regression.   International Journal of Engineering Development and Research, 6 (3), 571–577.  Koenker, R., & BassettJr, G. (1978). Regression quantiles.   Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric  Society , 33–50.  Kumkar, P., Madan, I., Kale, A., Khanvilkar, O., & Khan, A. (2018). Comparison of ensemble methods for  real estate appraisal. In 2018 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computation Technologies  (ICICT). 297–300.  Larraz, B., Alfaro-Navarro, J. L., Cano, L., Alfaro-Cortes, E., Garcia, E., N., & Gámez, M. (2021). A com -  puter-assisted expert algorithm for real estate valuation in Spanish cities.   Environment and Planning  B: Urban Analytics and City Science ,   48 (6), 1712–1727.   https://doi.org/10.1177/2399808320947729  Law, S., Paige, B., & Russell, C. (2019). Take a look around: Using street view and satellite images to  estimate house prices.   ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 10 (5), 1–19.   h  t  t  p  s  :  /  /  d  o  i  .  o  r g  /  1  0  .  1 1  4  5  /  3  3  4  2  2  4  0  Lindenthal, T., & Johnson, E. B. (2021). Machine learning, architectural styles and property values.   The  Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics , 1–32.  Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S. I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.   Advances in  neural information processing systems ,   30 .  Mayer, M., Bourassa, S. C., Hoesli, M., & Scognamiglio, D. (2019). Estimation and updating methods for  hedonic valuation.   Journal of European Real Estate Research ,   12 (1), 134–150.  Nnadozie, L., Matthias, D., & Bennett, E. (2022). A model for real estate price prediction using multi-  level stacking ensemble technique.   European Journal of Computer Science and Information  Technology, 10 (3), 33–45.  Oust, A., Hansen, S. N., & Pettrem, T. R. (2020). Combining property price predictions from repeat sales  and spatially enhanced hedonic regressions.   The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics ,   61 ,  183–207.   https://doi.org/10.1007/s11146-019-09723-x  Pace, R. K., & Gilley, O. W. (1998). Generalizing the OLS and grid estimators.   Real Estate Economics ,  26 (2), 331–347. 1   3  664

---

Comparing Housing Valuation Techniques and Stacked Generalization:… Pace, R. K., & Hayunga, D. (2020). Examining the information content of residuals from hedonic and spa -  tial models using trees and forests.   The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 60 , 170–180.  Pérez-Rave, J. I., Correa-Morales, J. C., & González-Echavarría, F. (2019). A machine learning approach  to big data regression analysis of real estate prices for inferential and predictive purposes.   Journal of  Property Research, 36 (1), 59–96.  Pollestad, A. J., Næss, A. B., & Oust, A. (2024). Towards a better uncertainty quantification in automated  valuation models.   The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics , 1–37.  Rosen, S. (1974). Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure competition.  Journal of Political Economy ,   82 (1), 34–55.  Sangani, D., Erickson, K., & Al Hasan, M. (2017). Predicting zillow estimation error using linear regres -  sion and gradient boosting. In 2017 IEEE 14th International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and  Sensor Systems (MASS), pp 530–534.  Schapire, R. E. (1990). The strength of weak learnability.   Machine Learning ,   5 , 197–227.  Shapley, L. S. (1953). A value for n-person games.   Contributions To the Theory of Games ,   2 , 307–317.  Simlai, E., P (2021). Predicting owner-occupied housing values using machine learning: An empirical  investigation of California census tracts data.   Journal of Property Research ,   38 (4), 305–336.  Sing, T. F., Yang, J. J., & Yu, S. M. (2021). Boosted tree ensembles for artificial intelligence based auto -  mated valuation models (AI-AVM).   The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 65 , 1.  Smyth, P., & Wolpert, D. (1997). Stacked density estimation.   Advances in Neural Information Processing  Systems ,   10 .  Stang, M., Krämer, B., Nagl, C., & Schäfers, W. (2022). From human business to machine learning—  Methods for automating real estate appraisals and their practical implications.   Zeitschrift für Immo -  bilienökonomie .   https://doi.org/10.1365/s41056-022-00063-1  Steel, M. F. (2020). Model averaging and its use in economics.   Journal of Economic Literature, 58 (3),  644–719.  Strumbelj, E., & Kononenko, I. (2010). An efficient explanation of individual classifications using game  theory.   The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11 , 1–18.  Trawiński, B., Telec, Z., Krasnoborski, J., Piwowarczyk, M., Talaga, M., Lasota, T., & Sawiłow, E. (2017).  Comparison of expert algorithms with machine learning models for real estate appraisal. In 2017  IEEE international conference on innovations in intelligent systems and applications (INISTA).  51–54.  Truong, Q., Nguyen, M., Dang, H., & Mei, B. (2020). Housing price prediction via improved machine  learning techniques.   Procedia Computer Science ,   174 , 433–442.   h  t  t  p  s  :  /  /  d  o  i  .  o  r g  /  1  0  .  1  0  1  6  /  j  .  p  r  o  c  s  .  2  0  2  0  .  0  6  .  1 1 1  Valier, A. (2020). The Cross Validation in Automated Valuation Models: A Proposal for Use. In Computa -  tional Science and Its Applications–ICCSA 2020: 20th International Conference, Cagliari, Italy, July  1–4, 2020, Proceedings, Part V   20 , 585–596.   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58814-4_45  Wan, W. X., & Lindenthal, T. (2023). Testing machine learning systems in real estate.   Real Estate  Economics ,   51 (3), 754–778.  Wang, J., Sui, J., Zhang, Z., Qi, J., Liu, N., & Lv, J. (2020). Empirical analysis of I-GBDT to improve the  accuracy of mass appraisal method.   Journal of Physics: Conference Series .   h  t  t  p  s  : / /  d  o i  .  o  r g  / 1  0  . 1  0 8  8  /  1 7  4  2  - 6 5  9  6  / 1  5 5 0  /  3  /  0  3  2  0  7  4  Wolpert, D. H. (1992). Stacked generalization.   Neural Networks ,   5 (2), 241–259.  Xu, X., & Zhang, Y. (2022). Second-hand house price index forecasting with neural networks.   Journal of  Property Research ,   39 (3), 215–236.  Yacim, J. A., & Boshoff, D. G. B. (2018). Impact of artificial neural networks training algorithms on accu -  rate prediction of property values.   Journal of Real Estate Research ,   40 (3), 375–418.  Yao, Y., Vehtari, A., Simpson, D., & Gelman, A. (2018). Using stacking to average Bayesian predictive  distributions (with discussion).   Bayesian Analysis, 13 (3), 917–1003.  Yoo, S. H. (2001). A robust estimation of hedonic price models: Least absolute deviations estimation.  Applied Economics Letters,   8 (1), 55–58.  Yoshida, T., Murakami, D., & Seya, H. (2022). Spatial prediction of apartment rent using regression-based  and machine learning-based approaches with a large dataset.   The Journal of Real Estate Finance and  Economics .   https://doi.org/10.1007/s11146-022-09929-6  Publisher’s Note   Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps  and institutional affiliations. 1   3  665